i 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS  
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Eighth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2025-26)'] 
 
 
SIXTEENTH  REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
16 
 


ii 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS  
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Eighth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2025-26)'] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on          19.08.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on              19.08.2025 
 
                    LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                   NEW DELHI 
 
 
                 August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 


iii 
 
CCIT No. 420 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 
 
 
 

iv 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................................................. (iii) 
INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................................................... (v) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………..................... 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………………………............... 25 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government……………………………….......................... 81 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration …………......... 82 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
are of interim in nature…......................................................................................... 83 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the 21st Sitting of the Committee held on 11.08.2025............................ 84 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Eighth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha). 86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Communications and 
Information Technology (2024-25)** 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
12. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
13. Shri Shafi Parambil 
14. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
15. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
16. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
17. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
18. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
19. Shri Devesh Shakya 
20. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Saket Gokhale* 
23. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
24. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
27. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Y.M. Kandpal  — Additional Secretary 
2.  Smt. A. Jyothirmayi  — Director 
3.  Shri Rajesh Mohan                 — Deputy Secretary 
  
 
**Committee constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024 vide Para No.833 of Bulletin Part -II dated 
26th September, 2024. 
* Shri Saket Gokhale  has been nominated vide Para No. 853 of Bulletin Part –II dated 03 rd 
October, 2024. 

vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Co mmunications and Information Technology 
(2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee, present this Sixteenth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Eighth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘Demands for Grants (2025 -26)’ relating to the 
Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications). 
2. The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the Table of  
Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 2025.   The Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Telecommunications) furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report on 11th June, 2025. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on               
11th August, 2025. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
           11  August, 2025  Chairperson, 
       20 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demand for Grants (202 5-26)' relating to the Ministry of 
Communications (Department of Telecommunications). 
 
2. The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                          
21st March, 2025 .  It contained 22 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received 
from the Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications). All the 22  
Recommendations have been categorized as accepted an d have been placed under 
Chapter-II. However, in view of the Action Taken Reply of the Department, some of the 
Recommendations (Nos. 3,4,6,12,14 and 17) have been commented upon in Chapter -I 
of the Report. Categorization of all the Observations/Recommendations is as under. 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the  
Government 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:– 1 to 22. 
 
  Total-22 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total -NIL 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total – NIL 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature  
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total – NIL 
Chapter-V 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendat ions accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Statement on the 

2 
 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report may be 
furnished to them at an early date.   
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
5. The Committee, in their Eighth Report, had recommended as under: 
Noting the revenue expenditure pattern for FY s 2023-24 and 2024 -25, the 
Committee observe that there has been a significant shortfall in spending by the 
Department.  The BE for revenue expenditure in FY 2024 -25 was revised to 
Rs.57169.79 crores from Rs.38475.54 crores that was initially allocated.  
However, upto December, 2024 only Rs.26864.48 crores had been  spent which 
was less than 50%.  Reasons attributed for the shortfall in spending  have been 
that revised allocation of funds was done only in January, 2025 leaving limited 
time for effective utilization.  Further, for FY 2025 -26, the allocation has been 
reduced to Rs.35851.50 crores against the proposed revenue expenditure of 
Rs.42557.88 crores indicating the efforts to moderate expenditure based on 
previous under -utilization trends.  T he Committee recommend that the 
Department may take suitable measures t o improve financial planning and fund 
disbursement mechanism so as  to ensure that budget allocations are received 
well in advance  and optimum expenditure incurred . A more structured quarterly 
disbursement system with predictable allocation schedules can mi tigate these 
issues and enable smoother execution of projects and expenditures. Additionally, 
process simplifications and better coordination between various stakeholders , 
including telecom operators, infrastructure providers, and Government agencies, 
should be implemented to expedite fund absorption. Reducing bureaucratic delays 
in project approvals and fund release can enhance efficiency and prevent last -
minute spending rushes, which often lead to suboptimal financial decisions. 
 
6. In their Action Taken Rep ly, t he Department of Telecommunications has 
submitted as under:– 
The total actual expenditure of Revenue section is Rs. 52,864.02 Crore as on 
31.03.2025 against allocation of Rs.57,169.79 in RE 2024-25 which is 92.47%. 
The shortfall is mainly due to the following items:- 
                                                                                                             (Rs. In Crores) 
Items RE 2024-
25 
Actuals as 
on 31-03-
2025 
Shortfall Reason 
Compensation 
to Telecom 
Service 
Provides 
7000 4643.08 2356.92 Digital Bharat Nidhi supports 
schemes in areas where 
operators on their own 
commercial incentives do not 

3 
 
 
 find it viable due to 
difficulties in execution and 
low returns. There are many 
challenges in implementation 
of these projects like - widely 
dispersed locations across 
remote corners of the 
country, difficult terrains 
(including Hilly/ Rocky), 
difficulty in access of 
locations, Left Wing 
Extremism (LWE) affected 
areas, Right of Way (RoW) 
issues, lack of infrastructure 
and skilled labour, difficu lties 
in communication and 
transportation etc. 
Pension 19306 18228.71 1077.29 94.42% has been utilized. 
Production 
Linked 
Incentive 
Scheme 
1450.97 843.93 607.04 BE/ RE figures are based on 
the incentive against the 
sales forecast given by the 
companies a t the time of 
initial approval. However, 
actual incentives vary 
depending on actual sales 
achieved by PLI company. 
Actual sales of the 
companies depend on 
various market forces and 
orders received by 
companies. 
International 
Co-operation 
192.90 135.49 57.41 Less expenditure is due to  
i. the changes in rental policy 
of ITPO. 
The finalized rental rates 
were significantly lower than 
the earlier estimated rates. 
ii. Further Host country 
contribution reduced due to 
adjustment from the previous 
contributions. 
iii. Exchange Rate 

4 
 
fluctuations. 
iv. Here it is also mentioned 
that some bills are still under 
process. 
 
 
 Steps taken to address utilisation of fund and monitoring mechanism:  
PLI (Producitivity Linked Initiatives) 
i. To enhance utilization of funds, Departm ent modified scheme guidelines and 
introduced quarterly disbursement of incentives. Quarterly disbursement of incentives 
will improve cash flow of companies and enable them to be more competitive.  
ii. To avoid any delay in disbursement of incentive, the Depar tment has framed 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for processing of claims made by companies.  
iii. The process for disbursement of incentive is done through an online system ensuring 
monitoring of claims by the Ministry/Department. The scheme, including the 
disbursement of incentives, is also subjected to regular oversight at higher levels 
within this Department, the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
and the Empowered Group of Secretaries. 
DBN (Digital Bharat Nidhi) 
iv. Digital Bharat Nidhi has implemented ‘Online Project Monitoring Information System’ 
for settlement of claims under DBN Schemes. Further, to solve various is sues under 
the DBN’s Schemes, Project Monitoring Units have been setup under DBN. Meetings 
to review the physical and financial progress of DBN’s Schemes are being taken with 
DBN’s Implementers on monthly and quarterly basis.  
 
7. The Committee, noting the significant shortfall in revenue expenditure by 
the Department during FY s 2023-24 and 2024 -25, had expressed concern over  
underutilization of funds. Despite the revised budget estimate for FY 2024-25 being 
increased from Rs. 38,475.54 crores to Rs. 57,169.79 crores, only Rs. 26,864.48 
crores (less than 50%) had been spent till December 2024. The Committee  had 
observed that the delay in the revision of budget allocations, which occurred only 
in January 2025, left insufficient time for effective fund utilization. For FY 2025 -26, 
the allocation was reduced to Rs. 35,851.50 crores from the proposed Rs. 
42,557.88 crores, reflecting efforts to moderate expenditure based on past trends. 
The Committee had recommended that the Department improve its financial 
planning and fund disbursement mechanisms by ensuring timely receipt of budget 
allocations well in advance. A structured quarterl y disbursement system with 
predictable schedules should be implemented to facilitate smoother project 
execution. Additionally, simplification of processes and better coordination among 
stakeholders, including telecom operators, infrastructure providers, an d 
Government agencies, was urged to expedite fund utilisation. The Committee had 

5 
 
further emphasized in reducing bureaucratic delays in project approvals and fund 
releases to enhance efficiency and avoid last -minute spending rushes that often 
lead to suboptimal decisions. 
 
In response, the Department of Telecommunications has reported that the 
total actual revenue expenditure for FY 2024 -25 stood at Rs. 52,864.02 crores 
against the revised allocation of Rs. 57,169.79 crores, achieving 92.47% utilization 
by 3 1 March 2025. The shortfall was mainly in areas such as compensation to 
telecom service providers, pension payments, the Production Linked Incentive 
(PLI) scheme, and international cooperation. Challenges impacting expenditure 
included operational difficul ties in remote and difficult terrains, Right of Way 
issues, security concerns, and delays caused by external factors such as 
exchange rate fluctuations. To address fund  utilization, the Department ha d 
modified PLI scheme guidelines to introduce quarterly d isbursement of incentives 
supported by Standard Operating Procedures and online claim processing for 
better moni toring. Digital Bharat Nidhi ha d implemented an Online Project 
Monitoring Information System and had set up Project Monitoring Units to 
regularly review progress and resolve implementation issues. These measures 
aimed to enhance cash flow, improve competitiveness, and expedite fund 
absorption while ensuring transparency and oversight through inter -ministerial 
coordination. 
 
 The Committee note the Department’s efforts to improve fund utilization 
through enhanced monitoring and revised disbursement mechanisms. However, 
the Committee reiterate the need for timely and predictable budget allocations well 
before the commencement of the financial year to avoid delays in expenditure. The 
Committee desire that the Department further strengthen coordination among all 
stakeholders to effectively tackle on -ground challenges such as difficult terrain 
and infrastructure constraints. The Committee emphasise on the need for process 
simplification and reduction in bureaucratic hurdles to facilitate faster project 
approvals and fund releases. Regular monitoring and review meetings should be 
institutionalized to promptly identify bottlenecks and ensure optimal utiliza tion of 
allocated funds. The Committee expect  the Department to maintain stringent 
expenditure discipline and optimal absorption capacity, thereby translating budget 
provisions into tangible developmental outcomes without recurring 
underutilization.  Further, the Committee would like to be apprised about the 
effectiveness of the various measures taken by the Department with respect to 
fund utilisation.  
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
8. The main sources of revenue receipts of the Department are License Fee, 
 Spectrum Usage Charges and Spectrum Auction receipts.  The License Fee 
 receipts has been Rs.16614.36 crores in 2021 -22, Rs.20316.28 crores in 2022 -
 23, Rs.36363.17 crores in 2023 -24 and Rs.13991.41 crores in 2024 -25 upto 
 31.12.2024.  The estimates for FY 202 5-26 has been Rs.27,300 crores.  Under 
 the category of Spectrum Usage Charges, the receipts has been Rs.7511.71 

6 
 
 crores in FY 2021 -22, Rs.5743.62 in 2022 -23, Rs.13065.18 in FY 2023 -24 and 
 Rs.2305.15 crores in FY 2024-25 upto 31.12.2024.  For FY 2025-26, the projected 
 receipt is Rs.3500 crores.  Further, the details of receipt under Spectrum Auction 
 Receipts are Rs. 60814.06 crores in FY 2021 -22, Rs.37816.00 crores in FY 2022-
 23, Rs.42617.89 crores in 2023 -24 and Rs.41452.56 crores in 2024 -25 upto 
 31.12.2024.  For FY 2025 -26 Rs.44744.27 crores is the estimated Spectrum 
 Auction Receipts.  
While examining the factors affecting revenue receipts, the Department, inter -alia, 
submitted that revenue of telecom operators, regulatory policies, technological 
advancements such as  5G, 6G, market competition, subscriber growth and 
demands, pricing strategy, infrastructure etc. affect the revenue receipts.  Further, 
the Department submitted that as a part of telecom reforms, Spectrum Usage 
Charges(SUC) have been red uced to zero for the spectrum acquired through 
auction held in 2022 and subsequent years.  Furthermore, the Department 
submitted that reforms introduced in September, 2021 are expected to decrease 
the cost of operations for TSPs, facilitate foreign investm ent and increase ease of 
doing business for Telecom Service Providers ( TSPs).  The Department also 
submitted that these reforms would also increase revenue for TSPs and thereby 
increase the AGR based  revenue receipts of the Government of India.  
Elaborating upon the steps taken by  the Department to achieve targets during 
FY 2025-26, the Department stated that  the measures taken included (a) facility 
to make online paperless payments; (b)  fully Digital and paperless submission of 
financial documents; (c)  online grievance resolution process; and (d) and 
continuous monitoring of receipts of spectrum deferred instalments and spectrum 
usage charges.  The Committee hope that  these measures taken by the 
Department would augment the revenue receipts and achieve  the intended 
objectives.  The Committee urge the Department to periodically monitor the 
effectiveness of the measures that are being put in place for increasing revenue 
receipts. 
9. In their Action Taken Reply , the Department of Telecommunications submitted as 
under:– 
 
 Department has taken following measures to digitize, standardize and streamline 
 the LF/SUC Assessment related workflows for all the stakeholders so as to ensure 
 accurate and timely assessment thereby improving public revenues and overall 
 growth of telecom sector with better infrastructure planning and management. 
 
1. A Revenue Management Software SARAS (System for Assessment of LF 
Revenue and SUC) has been implemented, which has digitised the  assessments, 
payment and accounting of license fees,  spectrum usage charges etc. along with 
all ancillary processes 
2. SARAS enables the Licensee to make online payments, digitally file and verify 
deduction claims, AGR statements, bank guarantee details  along with  enabling 

7 
 
the Department to conduct online asse ssment of LF and SUC, management of 
bank guarantees, handle representations etc. 
3. SARAS also incorporates features for grievance management and knowledge 
sharing for facilitating better communication amongst the department and the 
licensees. It also provide s email and SMS alerts to the users for ensuring timely 
action on the respective tasks. 
4. The Department has started Telecom Facilitation Centre to assist various 
stakeholder like startups, MSMEs, academia, licensees, registration holders etc. 
in not only na vigating regulatory processes but also handholding for various 
schemes of the department and fostering innovation. 
 
5. Department has been hand holding licensees for on -boarding on SARAS portal 
and making submissions / payments through Telecom Outreach Programs (TOP). 
 
10. The Committee had noted that the main sources of revenue receipts for the 
Department were License Fee, Spectrum Usage Charges (SUC), and Spectrum 
Auction receipts. While the Department reported increasing receipts from these 
sources over the pas t few years, the figures for 2024 -25 up to December showed 
fluctuations and indicated challenges in maintaining consistent revenue inflows. 
The Committee had observed that various factors such as telecom operators’ 
revenue, regulatory policies, advancement s in technology like 5G and 6G, market 
competition, subscriber growth, pricing strategies, and infrastructure  had 
impacted revenue receipts. The Committee had also noted that the reforms 
initiated by the Department, including the reduction of SUC to zero f or spectrum 
acquired in auctions from 2022 onwards, and the reforms introduced in September 
2021 aimed at lowering operational costs for telecom service providers (TSPs), 
encouraging foreign investment, and improving ease of doing business. These 
reforms were expected to enhance revenue for TSPs and consequently increase 
the Adjusted Gross Revenue (AGR) -based receipts for the Government. The 
Committee were also apprised about  the Department’s efforts towards digitization 
such as online payments, fully digit al submission of financial documents, online 
grievance redressal, and continuous monitoring of spectrum payments. The 
Committee had hoped that these measures would augment revenue receipts and 
had urged the Department to regularly monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of 
these initiatives to ensure targets for FY 2025-26 are met. 
In its Action Taken Reply, the Department of Telecommunications has highlighted 
that the implementation of the SARAS (System for Assessment of LF Revenue and 
SUC) Software, has di gitized and streamlined workflows related to License Fee 
and Spectrum Usage Charges assessment, payments, and accounting. SARAS 
had enabled licensees to make online payments, digitally file and verify claims and 
statements, and facilitates online assessment by the Department. The system also 
managed bank guarantees, handled  representations, and incorporated  grievance 
management along with communication tools such as email and SMS alerts to 

8 
 
ensure timely compliance. To further support stakeholders including startups, 
MSMEs, academia, and licensees, the Department ha d established the Telecom 
Facilitation Centre, which assisted  with regulatory navigation, scheme 
handholding, and fostering innovation. Additionally, through Telecom Outreach 
Programs (TOP s), the D epartment was actively on boarding  licensees onto the 
SARAS portal to encourage digital payments and submissions, thereby enhancing 
transparency, efficiency, and revenue collection. 
The Committee do appreciate the Department’s adoption of advanced digital tools 
like SARAS and the establishment of facilitation mechanisms aimed at improving 
revenue assessment and collection processes. The Committee believe  that such 
initiatives will not only enhance accuracy and timeliness in revenue receipts but 
also contribute to the overall growth and modernization of the telec om sector. The 
Committee desire that  the Department continue its proactive engagement with 
stakeholders through outreach program mes and ensure that the Telecom 
Facilitation Centre remains effective in  addressing the needs of diverse players. 
They urge  the Department to conduct periodic reviews to assess the impact of 
digitization and regulatory reforms on revenue augmentation and make necessary 
adjustments to policies and processes. The Committee expect sustained focus on 
improving ease of doing business, fostering innovation, and ensuring that the 
ambitious revenue targets set for FY 2025 -26 are achieved through these 
measures. The Committee may be apprised of the outcome of these measures.  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
11. The Committee , in their Original Report, had made the following 
Observation/Recommendation:– 
Universal Service Obligation Fund(USOF) was created  w.e.f 1.4.2002 in 
pursuance of  The Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003 to provide financ ial 
support to the telecom service in commercially unviable rural and remote areas of 
the country.  This is an attached office of DoT headed by an Administrator 
appointed by the Central Government.  With effect from 26.06.2024, USOF has 
been renamed as Dig ital Bharat Nidhi  (DBN).  As per the Indian Telegraph Act, 
1885, Licence Fee includes Universal Access Levy which is charged at the rate of 
5% of the adjusted Gross Revenue of the telecom licences.  The fund collected 
under UAL goes to the Consolidated Fund of India and it is non-lapsable in nature.  
The outflow from Consolidated Fund of India to USOF is through regulatory 
provisions of the Ministry of Finance each year based on requirement of USOF.  
The Department has submitted that since inception of the then USOF in FY 2002-
03 and subsequent renaming as DBN on 26.6.2024, UAL amounting to 
Rs.171590.68 crores has been collected till 31.12.2024.  The balance of UAL 
amount available as on 31.12.2024 is Rs.86359.77 crores.  Further, the 
Department has stated that the Government has approved committed expenditure 
of Rs.1.3 lakh crores for Bharat Net Scheme for next 10 years on 04.08.2023 
alongwith other committed liabilities for other ongoing schemes.  While reviewing 

9 
 
the performance of the schemes under DBN, th e Committee note that under 
amended Bharat Net Programme , BSNL has given notice for inviting tenders for 
selection of Project Implementin g Agencies (PIAs).  The selection of PIA s are for 
development (creation, upgradation, operation and maintenance) of Mid dle-mile 
Network of Bharat Net on Design, Build, Operate and Maintain Model.  The 
Department has submitted that RFP was floated by BSNL for selection of Project 
Implementation Agencies(PIAs) for 16 packages(excluding Eight State led Model 
States) on 15.02. 2024 and out of 16 packages that were opened on 07.08.2024, 
advance work order for 6 packages have been issued and further Master Service 
Agreements have been signed between BSNL and respective PIAs for three 
packages and evaluation of remaining packages a re ongoing.  RFP for selection 
of Independent Engineer s (04 packages) for overseeing work of PIAs in 16 
packages was opened on 15.10.2024 and RFP for Independent Engineer (02 
packages) for overseeing work of PIAs in Eight packages (under State led model) 
was opened on 18.10.2024.  Technical bids are under evaluation. 
 
Submitting information on Mobile Projects, the Department has stated that the 
delay in installation and supply of indigenously developed and domestically 
manufactured equipment is the main cau se for the shortfall in schemes namely 
4G Saturation Scheme and LBE Phase -I upgradation, Border Out 
Post(BOP)/Border Intelligence Post(BIP) etc. The Department has submitted that 
in order to achieve the targets , multi cornered approach has been taken up at  
various levels for resolution of issues in the projects and for resolving roadblocks , 
if any, and also assisting in getting clearances for projects.  The Committee urge 
the Department to finalise the technical bids which are under evaluation at the 
earliest so as to  ensure periodic monitoring and expeditious implementation of 
amended Bharat Net Programme . Further, the Committee are of the considered 
opinion that the initiatives of the Department would fructify and intended objectives 
would be successfully achieved. The Committee may be apprised of the result. 
 
12. In their Action Taken Reply, the Department of Telecommunications submitted as 
under:– 
 The progress made and measure taken by the Department for effective 
implementation of DBN Projects are as under: 
  
(i) Saturation of 4G mobile services in uncovered villages across the 
country: The Union Cabinet on 27.07.2022 approved an USOF funded project for 
saturation of 4G mobile services in uncovered villages across the country at a 
total cost of Rs. 26,316 Cr .  The project will provide 4G mobile services in 24,680 
uncovered villages in remote and difficult areas. The project has a provision to 
include additional villages on account of rehabilitation, new -settlements, 
withdrawal of services by existing operators etc.  In addition, 6,279 villages having 
only 2G/3G connectivity shall be upgraded to 4G.  The revised Project Cost is Rs. 
30620.49 crore.  

10 
 
Agreement has been signed with BSNL on 06.02.2023. Further, rollout period has 
been extended upto June, 2025. As o n April, 2025, total 17,220 towers including 
upgradation of 654 towers have been planned. Out of which 11,139 towers have 
been made on air covering 15,249 villages.  
  
(ii). Border Out Posts (BOPs) and Border Intelligence Posts (BIPs) Project:  
The Union Cabinet on 24.03.2023 had  approved the Project for the Provision of 
4G based mobile services at 1,117 locations of Border Out Posts (BOPs) of BGFs 
and Border Intelligence Posts (BIPs) of IB on nomination basis to BSNL. 72 
additional locations were also forwa rded by MHA have been added in the 
schemes. As on April, 2025, 92 towers have been installed providing coverage at 
140 Posts.  
  
(iii) Amended Bharat Net Programme: Amended Bharat Net Programme (ABP) 
targets to provide high speed broadband connectivity to all inhabited villages in 
the country. BSNL has been appointed Project Management Agency (PMA) for 
Amended Bharat  Net Project.  BSNL has put Notice Inviting Tenders (NITs) for 
selection of Project Implementing Agencies  (PIAs) for Development (creation, 
upgradation, operation & maintenance) of middle mile network of Bharat  Net on 
Design Build Operate and Maintain (DBOM) model for sixteen packages. 
 
Under Amended Bharat Net Programme, following measures have been taken: 
 
i. Technical and Financial bids are opene d. Advance work order has been 
issued by PMA i.e. BSNL for Twelve Packages (namely UP(E), UP(W), 
Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Bihar, West Bengal, Andaman and Nicobar, 
MP, Uttaranchal , J&K, Ladakh, Karnataka, Puducherry, Goa, NE -II 
(Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur,  Nagaland), Kerala and rest are under 
process. Out of which, agreement has been signed by BSNL for Six 
Packages (namely UP(E), UP(W), Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Bihar,West 
Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar).  
ii. RFP for C -NoC was released on 01.01.2025 and BSNL h as issued 
amendment on 28.03.2025 and last date of Bid submission is 19.05.2025. 
iii. To ensure periodic monitoring and expeditious implementation of Amended 
Bharat Net Programme , PMA i.e. BSNL for ABP is developing the Project 
Monitoring Tool which ,inter-alia, includes milestone details & achievement, 
inventory management, etc.  
 
The details of Funds allocation and utilization during FY 2024 -25 for various 
DBN’s Schemes are as under:  
                                                                         (Rs in crores) 
Name of Scheme BE allotted RE allotted Fund Disbursed 
(as on 31.03.2025) 
Bharat Net 8500 6500 3995.01 
Other DBN’s Projects 10500 7200 4803.15 
Total 19000 13700 8798.16 

11 
 
  
In current FY 2025 -26, BE of Rs. 28,400 crores have been allotted incl udes Rs. 
22,000 crores for Bharat Net (Capital Head) and Rs. 6,400 crores for Other DBN's 
Schemes (Revenue Head).  
 
13. The Committee in their Original Report had noted that the creation of the 
Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) from 1 April 2002 under t he Indian 
Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003, aimed at financially supporting telecom 
services in commercially unviable rural and remote areas. The USOF, now 
renamed Digital Bharat Nidhi (DBN) since 26 June 2024, functioned as an attached 
office of the Depart ment of Telecommunications (DoT) and was funded through 
the Universal Access Levy (UAL) charged at 5% of the Adjusted Gross Revenue of 
telecom licenses. The Committee had observed that up to 31 December 2024, Rs. 
1,71,590.68 crores had been collected as UA L, with a balance of Rs. 86,359.77 
crores available  after disbursal . The Government ha d committed Rs. 1.3 lakh 
crores for the Bharat Net Scheme over the next 10 years along with liabilities for 
ongoing schemes. Reviewing the progress of DBN schemes, the Co mmittee had 
noted that BSNL ha d initiated tenders for the selection of Project Implementing 
Agencies (PIAs) for the middle -mile network development under the amended 
Bharat Net Programme  (ABP). While some packages ha d received advance work 
orders and agree ments, others were still under evaluation. The Committee also 
recognized delays in mobile projects like 4G Saturation, LBE Phase -I upgradation, 
and Border Out Posts due to supply and installation issues of indigenous 
equipment. The Committee had urged the Department to expedite the technical bid 
evaluations, ensure periodic monitoring, and implement the amended Bharat Net 
Programme expeditiously. The Committee had expressed confidence that the 
Department’s initiatives would achieve the intended objectives a nd requested to 
be apprised of the results. 
 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department of Telecommunications has 
informed that significant progress has been made in implementing DBN projects. 
The 4G saturation project covering 24,680 uncovered villages, ap proved by the 
Union Cabinet in July 2022 at a revised cost of Rs. 30,620.49 crores, has rolled out 
11,139 towers covering 15,249 villages as of April 2025, with rollout extended to 
June 2025. The Border Out Posts (BOPs) and Border Intelligence Posts (BIPs)  
project, approved in March 2023, has installed 92 towers providing coverage to 
140 posts. Regarding the amended Bharat Net Programme , BSNL has been 
appointed as Project Management Agency and has floated tenders for PIAs to 
develop the middle -mile network under the Design , Build, Operate and Maintain 
model for sixteen packages. Technical and financial bids have been opened, with 
advance work orders issued for twelve packages and agreements signed for six. 
The RFP for the Common Network Operations Centre (C -NoC) was released in 
January 2025 with bid submission ongoing. BSNL is also developing a Project 
Monitoring Tool to enable milestone tracking and inventory management to ensure 
effective oversight and timely implementation. Financially, Rs. 8,798.16 cro res had 

12 
 
been disbursed in FY 2024-25 against Rs. 13,700 crores revised estimates for DBN 
schemes. For FY 2025 -26, Rs. 28,400 crores has been budgeted, including Rs. 
22,000 crores for Bharat Net and Rs. 6,400 crores for other DBN schemes. 
 The Committee take c ognisance of  the detailed progress made by the 
Department in implementing the DBN projects, particularly the commendable 
advancement in 4G saturation and border connectivity initiatives. They also 
welcome the structured approach adopted under the amended Bharat Net 
Programme with clear milestones, tender processes, and monit oring tools. The 
Committee urge  the Department to maintain rigorous oversight and expedite 
pending evaluations and contract finalizations to ensure timely completion of all 
packages. Fur ther, the Committee desire  that fund disbursement and project 
execution remain transparent, efficient, and closely monitored to prevent delays 
and cost overruns. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made 
with respect to  these critical initiatives.  
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
Enhancing Last-Mile Connectivity and Utilization in Rural Areas 
14. The Committee , in their Original Report, made the following 
observations/recommendations:–  
The Department has set ambitious targets for Bharat  Net and FTTH expansion; 
however, last-mile connectivity and effective utilization remain key challenges . As 
per the Department’s submission, only 12.24 lakh FTTH connections  have been 
provided under Bharat  Net as of January 2025, while the target for March 2026 
stands at 18 lakh connections. Similarly, the installation of 1,04,574 Wi-Fi hotspots 
across Gram Panchayats (GPs) suggests that while infrastructure exists, its actual 
usage remains suboptimal. The Committee note with concern  that despite the 
significant infrastructure rollout, Bharat Net’s potential remains underutilized. 
To address this gap and ensure widespread adoption, the Committee recommend 
the Department to introduce a Last-Mile Connectivity Acceleration Program me 
(LMCAP) under Bharat Net Udyami with targeted interventions. This could include 
a Localized Entrepreneurship Model , where rural entrepreneurs are empowered 
through a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model , allowing trained local service 
providers to manage and expand FTTH and Wi -Fi network s under a revenue -
sharing framework. Additionally, the Department could implement Subsidized 
Internet Plans , ensuring tiered broadband pricing to make internet access 
affordable for rural households while offering free connectivity to essential public 
institutions such as schools, PHCs, Anganwadis, and Police Stations . 
Furthermore, to drive sustained data consumption and maximize Bharat  Net’s 
impact, the Committee recommend mandatory integration of all  Government 
services in Bharat Net-covered areas, ensuri ng that e -governance, telemedicine, 
and digital education are exclusively accessed via Bharat  Net leading to the 
transition of  Bharat Net to a catalyst for digital empowerment in rural India. 

13 
 
 
15. In their Action Taken Reply , the Department of Telecommunications submitted as 
under:– 
i. Under the pilot project for provisioning of FTTH with subsidy support by 
DBN, BSNL has provisioned 5 lakh net FTTH connections to rural 
households, govt. institutions, private organisations and others, using 
Bharat Net  network. All  these connections have been provided through 
Bharat Net Udyami (BNU) model, by engaging rural entrepreneurs, in rural 
areas by utilising Bharat Net infrastructure. 
 
ii. Meanwhile the construction of Bharat Net network in ring topology including 
upgradation of the existing network has also been initiated under Amended 
Bharat Net Programme  in many States by BSNL and in more it will start 
shortly. So far, the utilisation has been low owing to limited geographical 
coverage over Bharat Net  network and also not -so-good uptime due to 
network being in linear topology. 
iii. With above robust and reliable network and through increased geographic 
coverage of network, it is expected to provide digital connectivity to more 
and more Institutions and households, enabling them to u se the digital 
infrastructure and boost their economic condition, as individual and society 
as a whole. 
 
iv. As per Amended Bharat Net Programme , 1.50 crore rural home fibre 
connections to be provided distributed across all States/UTs with priority to 
cover Go vernment institutions including schools, Primary Health Centers, 
Anganwadis, Panchayat offices etc., using the BNU model over the next 
five years. BNU could be a village level entrepreneur, Internet Service 
Provider, Self Help Group (SHG), etc. Bharat Net Udyamis (BNUs) will be 
used for providing and maintaining last -mile connectivity from village to 
households. BNUs will be given a one -time financial incentive for activating 
new home fibre connections. To incentivize continuity of services, BNUs 
will also receive a share of the monthly revenue. Under the ABP, subsidy 
support per home fibre connections comprises capital incentive (including 
OFC, Customer Premises Equipment, all other accessories etc.) and 
support towards provision of Internet Lease Line (ILL ) has been funded by 
DBN. Further, BSNL will ensure that ILL subsidy should entirely be passed 
on to the end customers, so that an affordable and subsidized tariff/ plan 
will be available to the rural customers. BSNL shall submit a self -
certification to this effect on quarterly basis. Accordingly, an Agreement has 
been signed between DBN and BSNL on 09.04.2025 on utilization of 
Bharat Net  network for providing rural home fibre connections under 
Amended Bharat Net Programme. 
 
v. Further, in compliance with the Union Budget’  2025-26 announcement 
[Para 42] i.e. “Provide the FTTH connections in Schools and PHCs in rural 
areas through Bharat Net  network”, BSNL has started to provide FTTH 

14 
 
connections using Bharat Net, in coordination with State Govt. as per the 
details made available by Central ministry through DBN. These FTTH 
connections are being provided through Bharat Net Udyami partners under 
ABP. Similarly, efforts are being made to cover other Institutions in 
coordination with related Ministry/Departments and the State Governments. 
 
vi. As on 15.04.2025, a total of 12,81,067 FTTH connections have been 
provisioned using Bharat Net.  
 
vii. Further, BSNL in support with DBN, will make full efforts to coordinate with 
Govt. Department for providing FTTH connections under ABP.  The FTTH 
connections will be provided in rural areas as per demand and network 
feasibility of Bharat Net network. 
 
16. The Committee had observed that while  the Department ha d set ambitious 
targets for Bharat Net  and FTTH expansion, challenges remain ed in las t-mile 
connectivity and effective utilization of the infrastructure. As of January 2025, only 
12.24 lakh FTTH connections had been provided under Bharat Net Scheme against 
a target of 18 lakh connections by March 2026. Similarly, altho ugh 1,04,574 Wi -Fi 
hotspots ha d been installed across Gram Panchayats, actual usage was 
suboptimal. The Committee had expressed concern that Bharat Net ’s 
infrastructure potential remained underutilized. 
 To address this, the Committee had recommended that the Department  to 
introduce a Last -Mile Connectivity Acceleration Program (LMCAP) under Bharat 
Net Udyami with target ted measures. These include d adopting a Localized 
Entrepreneurship Model, empowering rural entrepreneurs via Public -Private 
Partnership (PPP) framework to mana ge and expand FTTH and Wi -Fi networks on 
a revenue-sharing basis. The Department was also urged to implement subsidized 
internet plans with tiered broadband pricing to make internet access affordable for 
rural households and provide free connectivity to ke y public institutions such as 
schools, PHCs, Anganwadis, and Police Stations. Furthermore, the Committee had 
recommended mandatory integration of Government services with Bharat Net  
coverage, so that e -governance, telemedicine, and digital education are ac cessed 
exclusively via Bharat Net, transforming it into a catalyst for digital empowerment 
in rural India. 
 The Department of Telecommunications has submitted that under a pilot 
project supported by DBN, BSNL has provisioned 5 lakh net FTTH connections to 
rural households, government institutions, and private organizations through the 
Bharat Net Udyami (BNU) model by engaging rural e ntrepreneurs. The Department 
had initiated creation of Bharat Net ’s ring topology network, including upgrades 
under the Amende d Bharat Net Programme  (ABP), which will improve network 
uptime and geographical coverage, addressing earlier issues with linear topology 
and limited utilization. 

15 
 
 The ABP target ted 1.5 crore rural home fibre connections across all States 
and UTs over five  years, prioritizing Government institutions like schools, PHCs, 
Anganwadis, and Panchayat  offices. The BNU model empowered  village-level 
entrepreneurs, ISPs, and Self Help Groups to provide and maintain last -mile 
connectivity, supported by one -time financ ial incentives and monthly revenue 
shares. Subsidies covered capital expenditure and Internet Lease Line (ILL) costs, 
with BSNL ensuring that these cost benefits were fully passed on to rural 
consumers, confirmed via quarterly self-certification. 
 In align ment with the Union Budge t 2025 -26 announcement, BSNL had  
begun provisioning FTTH connections to schools and PHCs in rural areas, 
coordinating with State Governments and relevant Departments. As of 15 April 
2025, 12,81,067 FTTH connections ha ve been provis ioned via Bharat Net , and 
efforts continued to meet demand and network feasibility requirements. 
 The Committee  do appreciate the Department’s proactive measures in 
scaling up FTTH connections and adopting a localized entrepreneurial approach to 
last-mile connectivity. The transition to a ring topology network under ABP is 
expected to significantly improve service reliability and coverage.  However, the 
Committee would like to emphasise the importance of accelerating implementation 
to meet and exceed the set  targets within the stipulated timelines  so as to enable 
our rural households to become self - reliant in digital technology . They urge 
continued monitoring of the affordability and quality of services, especially in rural 
areas, and call for concerted efforts to ensure that Bharat Net ’s infrastructure 
translates into tangible digital empowerment for rural communities. The 
Committee look  forward to periodic updates on the progress of LMCAP and 
integration of digital services . They are  confident that these in itiatives will play a 
pivotal role in bridging the digital divide in India. 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan for Islands 
 
17. The Committee note that under the plan for Andaman & Nicobar Islands, 82 
 towers were to be set up for mobile services in 85 uncovered villages, along with 
 42 towers to bridge gaps in mobile connectivity along NH -4 (formerly NH -223). 
 While the project faced constraints due to logistical issues,  delay in  forest 
 permissions,  and non- availability of land, 66 sites have been commissioned so 
 far.  Additionally, the Submarine Optical Fibre Cable (OFC) project connecting 
 Kochi to Lakshadweep was completed and dedicated to the nation on January 
 3, 2024, with a total  estimated route length of 1,772 km an d a financial implication 
 of ₹1,072 crore. Further, the Department is supporting the augmentation of 
 telecom infrastructure in Lakshadweep at a total cost of ₹62.86 crore, which 
 includes upgrading 17 existing 2G towers to 4G, installing 20 new 4G towers , and 
 creating a 225 km  OFC network for Fiber-to-the-Home (FTTH) services. 

16 
 
The Committee observe that significant progress has been made under the 
telecom development initiatives in island s, including the Andaman & Nicobar and 
Lakshadweep Islands. Given the strategic significance of these islands, the 
Committee recommend that the Department ensure timely completion of the 
remaining towers in Andaman & Nicobar Islands by resolving pending permissions 
and land issues on priority. In Lakshadweep, the telecom  expansion must be 
accompanied by measures to enhance resilience against extreme weather 
conditions, ensuring that infrastructure remains functional during cyclones and 
other natural disasters. The Committee further recommend integrating telecom 
expansion with the promotion of e -governance, digital healthcare, and remote 
education services in the islands to maximize the socio -economic benefits of 
enhanced connectivity. Moreover, to reduce dependence on mainland India for 
connectivity, localized satellite -based solutions should be explored to provide 
redundancy and enhanced network reliability ensuring that the benefits of telecom 
expansion reach all uncovered regions, accelerating digital inclusion, economic 
development, and social empowerment. 
18. In their Action Taken Reply, the Department of Telecommunications submitted as 
under:– 
 
Mobile Services in ANI: - After survey, the executable scope of this project is 88 
4G towers. 41 of these towers are proposed to cover uncovered villages. 47 of 
these towers are planned along NH-4. 68 towers are commissioned.  
 
Infrastructure Project in Lakshadweep: - An agreement has been signed with 
BSNL on 01.10.2024. 19 new 4G sites are working. 17 existing sites have been 
upgraded to 4G services. Laying of OFC network is complet e and 7688 FTTH 
connections have been provided. 
Further, Amended Bharat Net Programme  has been approved by Cabinet in 
August 2023 under Design, Built, Operate and Maintain (DBOM) model, for 
upgradation of existing network of Bharat Net  Phase-I and Phase -II, creation of 
network in balance GPs by Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs), Operation and 
Maintenance for 10 years and utilization. It will cover all non -GP villages (~3.8 
lakh) on demand basis. BSNL has been nominated as the Project Management 
Agency and APO issued by BSNL to PIA in package 9 for A&N and West Bengal.  
 
19. The Committee had noted that under the telecom development plan for 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands (ANI), 82 towers were planned to provide mobile 
services in 85 uncovered villages, along with 42 towers to bridge connectivity 
gaps along NH -4 (formerly NH -223). Although the project experienced delays due 
to logistical challenges, forest permissions, and  land constraints, 66 sites ha d 
been commissioned so far. Additionally, the Submarine Optical F ibre Cable (OFC) 
project linking Kochi to Lakshadweep was completed and dedicated to the nation 
on January 3, 2024, covering 1,772 k m at a cost of ₹1,072 crore. In Lakshadweep, 
telecom infrastructure augmentation was underway with a budget of ₹62.86 crore, 

17 
 
including upgrading 17 existing 2G towers to 4G, installing 20 new 4G towers, and 
creating a 225 km OFC network for Fiber-to-the-Home (FTTH) services. 
 The Committee had observed the significant progress made in telecom 
development in island territories but had emphasized the strategic importance of 
timely completion. They had recommended that the Department prioritize 
resolving pending permissions and land issues to complete the remaining towers 
in Andaman & Nicobar Islands at the earliest. For Lakshadweep, telecom 
expansion should be accompanied by measures to enhance resilience against 
extreme weather conditions, ensuring uninterrup ted functionality during cyclones 
and natural disasters. Further, the Committee had urged integrating telecom 
infrastructure expansion with e -governance, digital healthcare, and remote 
education services to maximize socio -economic benefits. To reduce depen dency 
on mainland India for connectivity, it was also recommended to explore  localized 
satellite-based solutions to provide network redundancy and r eliability, thereby 
accelerate digital inclusion, economic growth, and social empowerment across 
these islands. 
 The Department of Telecommunications has informed that after survey, the 
executable scope for mobile services in ANI includes 88 4G towers — 41 to cover 
uncovered villages and 47 planned al ong NH -4. So far, 68 towers had  been 
commissioned regarding Lakshadweep, an agreement with BSNL was signed on 1 
October 2024. Currently, 19 new 4G sites were operational, and 17 existing sites 
were upgraded to 4G. The OFC network laying was complete, and 7,688 FTTH 
connections had  been provided.   Further, the Amended  Bharat Net Programme  
(ABP), approved by the Cabinet in August 2023 under the Design, Build, Operate,  
and Maintain (DBOM) model, aimed  at upgrading existing Bharat Net Phase-I and 
Phase-II networks, creating networks in balance Gram Panchayats by Project 
Implementing Agencies (PIAs), and ensuring 10 years of operation and 
maintenance. The ABP was also  to cover all non -GP villages (~3.8 l akh) on a 
demand basis. BSNL had  been nominated as the Project Management Agency 
(PMA) and ha d issued Authorization for Pr oject Operation (APO) to the PIA for 
Package 9 covering Andaman & Nicobar and West Bengal. 
 The Committee take note of  the substantial strides made in enhancing 
telecom connectivity in the island territories of Andaman & Nicobar and 
Lakshadweep. While appr eciating the commissioning of a majority of the planned 
towers and the successful completion of the Kochi -Lakshadweep Submarine OFC 
project, the Committee stress the need for expediting the remaining installations 
in a time -bound manner. The Committee  urge the Department to proactively 
resolve bottlenecks related to land and forest clearances, and ensure that ongoing 
infrastructure augmentation —particularly under the Amended Bharat Net 
Programme—is effectively aligned with the unique geographical and climat ic 
challenges of these regions. The Committee reiterate the importance of integrating 
telecom expansion with digital governance, education, and health services, and 
recommend exploring satellite -based technologies to enhance redundancy and 

18 
 
resilience, ther eby fostering inclusive growth and connectivity for the people of 
these strategically vital islands. The Committee would like to be apprised of all t he 
progress made in this regard within six months of presentation of this ATR in 
Parliament.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
20. Bridging the Digital Divide: Strengthening Tele -Density Through Targeted 
Financial and Policy Measures 
 The Committee note that, based on the data provided by the Department as o n 
30.11.2024, India has a total of 1187.73 million telephone c onnections, comprising 
527.47 million rural and 660.26 million urban connections. The overall teledensity stands 
at 84.36, with a significantly higher urban teledensity of 131.53 compared to rural 
teledensity at 58.23, highlighting the persistent digital d ivide. Furthermore, wireline 
teledensity remains low at 2.72, while wireless teledensity accounts for 81.65. In terms of 
market share, private service providers dominate the telecom sector, holding 91.28% of 
total telephone connections, whereas public sect or undertakings (BSNL and MTNL) 
account for only 8.72%. Notably, Reliance Jio has the highest share of total connections 
at 40.21%, followed by Bharti Airtel at 33.17% and Vodafone Idea at 17.67%. 
 Given these insights, the Committee recommend that the Dep artment intensify 
efforts to bridge the rural-urban teledensity gap by expanding affordable and high -quality 
telecom services in rural areas, particularly through Bharat Net and targetted subsidies 
for rural connectivity. The Committee further emphasize th e need to strengthen the 
wireline segment, especially for broadband expansion, by incentivizing fibre -based 
infrastructure deployment. Considering the declining market share of public sector 
telecom providers, the Committee urge the Department to formulate  a strategic revival 
plan for BSNL and MTNL, focusing on service quality improvement, competitive pricing, 
and digital service integration. Additionally, given the dominance of private players, 
ensuring fair competition and consumer protection be prioritiz ed through regulatory 
oversight, while also promoting indigenous telecom manufacturing to enhance sectoral 
resilience.  The Committee are of the concerted opinion that the Government can ensure 
inclusive and equitable telecom growth and foster digital empo werment across all 
regions. 
21. In their Action Taken Reply , the Department of Telecommunications submitted as 
under:– 
 Following programmes/projects have been executed in BSNL to bridge the rural -
urban teledensity gap .The details are as under. 
i) Bharat Net phase-I Project 
ii) Bharat Net phase-II Project 
iii) (Amended Bharat Net Programme) Bharat Net-phase- Ill 
Project 
iv) Bharat Net Utilization. 
 

19 
 
Bharat Net Phase-I 
 
 BSNL executed Bharat Net  Project on behalf of BBNL in 17 Circles covering   
1,04,173 GPs for establishment o f an optical fibre based network for providing 
broadband connectivity to Gram Panchayats for Universal services to rural population of 
the country as proposed by Govt. of India.  
 
 The objective of the project is to extend the existing optical fibre networ k to 
Panchayats by utilizing the Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) and creating an 
institutional mechanism for management and operation of National Optical Fibre Network 
(NOFN) for Non -discriminatory access to all the service providers. This has fac ilitated 
high bandwidth connectivity in the villages. 
 
Status of the project as on 31.03. 2025 
 
Total Work front (GPs + Block HQ)           : 1,04,173 GPs 
Service Ready GPs     : 1,04,146 GPs (99.9%) 
OFC Laid                                                             : 2,54,798 KM 
 
Bharat Net Phase-II 
 
 The objective of the project is to extend the existing optical fibre network to 
Panchayats by utilizing the Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) and creating an 
institutional mechanism for management and operation of National Optical Fibre Network 
(NOFN) for Non -discriminatory access to all the service providers. This has facilitated 
high bandwidth connectivity in the villages. 
The work of Bharat Net Phase –II was assigned to BSNL for M.P, U.P and W.B Circle 
(now Sikkim Circle) in non–EPC mode for 24,453 GPs, where BSNL is executing the 
Project by calling separate tenders for supply and execution. 
 
Status of Bharat Net-II Project as on 31.03.2025 
Total Work front: 24,453 GPs 
Service Ready: 24,290GPs (99 %) 
OFC LAID:- 75,881 KM 
Amended Bharat Net Programme: - Bharat Net-Ill Project:- 
 BSNL has been appointed as the single Project Management Agency (PMA) with 
overall responsibility ,inter-alia, including bandwidth provisioning at block level, selection 
of professional agencies through competitive bidding for construction, up gradation, O&M 
and utilization of Bharat Net network. The cabinet has extended the scope of Bharat Net 
to all 6.4 lakh inha bited GPs/villages including up gradation of existing network of Bharat 
Net phase-I and II to build the network in uncovered GPs and O&M for 10 years. 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
Status of (Amended Bharat Net Programme ) Bharat Net -Ill Project as on 
31.03.2025:- 
 
1.  On behalf of Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF), Department of 
Telecommunication, Government of India, BSNL has floated Tenders (16 
Packages) for Design, Supply, Construction, Installation, Upgradation, Operation 
and Maintenance of middle mile network of Bharat Net vide Tender Enquiry no. 
MM/BNO&M/BN-/T-791/2024 on 15-02-2024. 
2. The evaluation of bids in the subject tender has already been concluded and 
award of work is in process.  
3.  Agreements have been signed with the PIAs (Project Implementation Agency) 
with respect to the following six packages (out of 16 packages) of ABP Tender: 
(i) Package-3 (UP East) signed on 20.02.2025 with M/s RVNL. 
(ii) Package-6 (UP West) signed on 20.02.2025 with M/s RVNL. 
(iii) Package-8 (Himachal Pradesh) signed on 25.02.2025 with M/s ITI Ltd 
(iv) Package-9 (West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar) signed on 25.02.2025    
with M/s ITI Ltd 
(v) Package-12 (Punjab) signed on 19.02.2025 with M/s HFCL Ltd 
(vi) Package-7  (Bihar) signed on 12.03.2025 with M/s Polycab India Ltd 
 
4. Signing of agreement for following three packages, is under process: 
(i) Package-1 (M.P) with M/s  NCC 
(ii) Package-5 (UKD) with M/s  NCC 
(iii) Package-13 (J&K) with M/s  STL 
 
5. The matter regarding award of work in remaining seven packages is under 
process of approval of competent authority. 
 
Bharat Net Utilization: 
 
- Under Bharat Net  project Phase -I & Phase -II, the optical fibre network has been 
developed in rural areas.  
 
- The infrastructure created under Bharat Net project is being utilized for provisioning of 
broadband/internet services through Wi -Fi Hotspots, Fibre to the Home (FTTH) 
connections, leased lines, dark fibre, backhaul to mobile towers, etc. 
 
 BSNL is proactively  reaching to existing leftover copper based    fixed    line    
customers    for    upgradation   to   FTTH   technology.   BSNL   is   also adding value to 
the FTTH product offerings to improve the retention of exis ting customer base. BSNL is 
continuously improving its Urban and Rural tariff offerings for FTTH service. 
BSNL   has   extended   its   FTTH     reach   in   the country and has on boarded 41 
Lakh+ customers in last 5-6 years across 3,000+ towns and 46,000 + panchayats   in the 

21 
 
country. Further, BSNL is upgrading its fiber penetration in all States through local 
entrepreneur tie-up for last mile customer services. BSNL is continuously improving its  
value propositions in higher value premium FTTH plans to increase FTTH revenue. 
 
Phase IX.2 Project. For 4G mobile services 
 
 Based on the directions received from DoT & in line with the ‘AtmaNirbhar Bharat’ 
initiative of the Government of India, BSNL invited Expression of Interest (EoI) on 1st 
January, 2021 there by providing an opportunity to the Indigenous manufacturers to 
technically prove their product by participation in the PoC (proof of concept).  Upon 
successful completion of PoC, the bidder will become eligible to participate in the 4G 
tender of BSNL.  
BSNL issued 4G tender on 22.10.2022 for procurement of 1 lakh eNodeBs & associated 
core equipments on PAN India basis including Delhi & Mumbai LSA of MTNL on turnkey 
basis under Phase IX.2 Project. 
PO had  been issued to M/s ITI (RQ) on 08.06.2023 for west Zon e RAN, M/s TCS for 
Core Hardware in all zones and RAN in NZ+SZ+EZ & M/s CDOT for software of 4G Core 
for all zones on 22.06.2023. 
Total 87,363 eNodeBs have been in stalled & 78,708 eNodeBs are on –aired upto 
31.03.2025. The I& C of 1 Lakh eNodeBs is expected  to be completed by June – 2025. 
Further, BSNL has planned additional 22,000 sites to cater the supply requirement under 
Phase IX.2 project.  
The equipment being procured through BSNL 4G project is upgradable to 5G with 
software upgrade and minimal change of hardware. Total 38,825 sites to be upgraded to 
5G after roll out of 4G services.   
 
4G Saturation Project for mobile services in uncovered villages. 
 
 Provision of 4G in Uncovered villages across India: Union Cabinet approval has 
been received on 27 -07-2022 for provisioning of 4G mobile services by covering 24,680 
uncovered villages through 16,464 Mobile Tower sites in the country for 4G services.  
Provision is also there for additional 20% villages (4,936 villages/ 3,258 mobile towers) 
which are left out due to various reasons. 
 Mobile coverage for inhabited uncovered villages is provided by the Telecom 
Service Providers (TSPs) based on their techno-commercial viability. 
 To bridge the digital divide, Government, through funding from Digital Bharat Nidhi 
(DBN), is implementing various schemes for expansion of telecom connectivity 
through installation of mobile towers in the rural, remote and border areas of the 
country. 
 As of January 2025, out of 6,44,131 villages in the country (village data as per 
Registrar General of India), around 6,26,870 villages are covered with mobile 
connectivity. 
 Bharat Net  project is being implemented in a phased manner to provide 
connectivity to all the Gram Panchayats (GPs) for broadband services, such as 

22 
 
Wi-Fi Hotspots, Fibre to the Home (FTTH) connections etc. Further, the Union 
Cabinet has approved Amended Bharat Net Programme  for provisioning of 
connectivity to all GPs in the country in ring topology including upgrading existing 
network and connectivity to about 3.8 Lakh non-GP villages on demand basis. 
 For providing high bandwidth capacity internet/broadband connectivity and mobile 
services to remote & rural villages and islands in the country that currently lack coverage, 
a number of steps & projects have been taken up wit h funding from Digital Bharat Nidhi 
(DBN). Some of the projects have already been completed and many are under 
implementation. Details of the major projects are as follows: 
 
i. Bharat Net  project is being implemented in a phased manner to provide 
broadband co nnectivity to all the Gram Panchayats (GPs) and villages. The 
infrastructure created under Bharat Net project is a national asset, accessible on a 
non-discriminatory basis to the Service Providers, and the same can be utilized to 
provide broadband services , such as Fibre to the Home (FTTH) connections, 
leased lines, dark fibre, backhaul to mobile towers, etc. On 04.08.2023, the Union 
Cabinet has approved the Amended Bharat Net Programme (ABP) under Design, 
Built, Operate and Maintain (DBOM) model, for up-gradation of existing network of 
Bharat Net  Phase-I and Phase -II, creation of network in balance 42,000 GPs 
(approx.), Operation and Maintenance for 10 years and utilization. The 
connectivity to remaining non -GP villages (about 3.8 lakhs) is proposed to be 
provided on demand basis from their respective GPs. BSNL will have target of 
providing 1.50 crore FTTH connections to households in next five years. BSNL 
has been nominated as the Project Management Agency. As of Apr il-2025; 
2,14,325 GPs have been made serv ice ready under Bharat Net  project in the 
country. 
ii. For provision of high -speed internet/data and Mobile Services (including 4G) in 
remote & rural areas of the country, various target ted schemes/projects have 
been implemented. Comprehensive Telecom Developm ent Plan (CTDP) for 
mobile connectivity in the North Eastern Region, Comprehensive Telecom 
Development Plan for Islands (Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands), 
Scheme for providing mobile services in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected 
areas, Schemes for providing mobile services in Aspirational Districts, Scheme for 
providing mobile services in the border villages and other priority areas, 4G 
Saturation scheme to provide mobile coverage in all uncovered villages etc. The 
project for saturation of 4G mo bile services for providing 4G mobile services in 
uncovered villages in remote and difficult areas of the country is also under 
implementation. Till April-2025, 20,688 mobile towers have been commissioned in 
the country under various projects. 
iii. Commissioning of submarine optical fibre cable on 10.08.2020 between Chennai 
and Andaman & Nicobar Islands (2312 Km) for providing high speed internet/data 
connectivity to Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Commissioning of Submarine OFC 
connectivity between Mainland (Kochi) and Lakshadweep Islands (1869 km) 
(Total 11 Islands; Kavaratti, Kalpeni, Agatti, Amini, Androth, Minicoy, Bangaram, 
Bitra, Chetlat, Kiltan and Kadmath) on 03.01.2024. Creation of 225Km OFC 

23 
 
network in Lakshadweep Islands for provision of FTTH & other servic es. These 
optical fibre cable projects have facilitated faster roll out of mobile services 
(4G/5G) and other high-speed data/internet services in the Islands. 
 
 
 
22.  The Committee had recommended that the Department intensify efforts to 
bridge the rural -urban teledensity gap by expanding affordable, high -quality 
telecom services in rural areas, especially through the Bharat Net  project 
and target ted rural connectivity subsidies. It also emphasized the need to 
strengthen the wireline segment through incentives for fibre infrastructure, 
revive BSNL and MTNL via strategic reforms, ensure fair competition among 
dominant private players, and promote indigenous telecom manufacturing 
for national resilience. In response, the Department highlighted substantial 
progress under Bharat Net Phases I and II, with over 2,54,798    km s of OFC 
laid and 2.14 lakh Gram Panchayats (GPs) made service -ready as of March 
2025. The Amended Bharat Net Programme  (Bharat Net -III) has expanded 
scope to cover all 6.4 lakh villages, with tend ers awarded for several 
packages and more under process. BSNL’s FTTH outreach has reached 41 
lakh+ customers across 46,000+ panchayats. Additionally, BSNL’s 4G and 
4G saturation projects, under Phase IX.2, have installed over 87,000 eNodeBs 
with plans for 5G upgrades, aiming to cover 24,680 uncovered villages. The 
Department also reported successful implementation of submarine OFC 
links to remote islands and multiple schemes under Digital Bharat Nidhi to 
extend services to remote, border, LWE -affected, and aspirational districts. 
In view of the above initiatives undertaken by the Department, the Committee 
desire that the Department to accelerate the speed in executing Bharat Net-III 
and rural 4G projects, ensure full operationalization of the awarded packages 
in a time bound manner , expedite fiber -based broadband in all underserved 
areas, and implement robust reforms in BSNL and MTNL to ensure service 
competitiveness. The Committee also urge  strict regulatory oversight to 
preserve fair market practices and en sure consumer rights, while 
accelerating efforts to foster indigenous manufacturing and digital inclusion 
across the nation at the earliest. 
The Committee noted that as of 30.11.2024, India had 1187.73 million 
telephone connections, with a rural -urban split of 527.47 million and 660.26 
million, respectively. The overall teledensity stood at 84.36, with rural 
teledensity at 58.23 and urban teledensity at 131.53, indicating a significant 
digital divide. Wireline teledensity was low at 2.72, while wireless teledensity 
was 81.65. The Committee had recommended to intensify efforts to bridge 
the rural-urban gap through Bharat Net and targeted subsidies, incentivize  
fibre-based infrastructure, revive  BSNL and MTNL, and ensure  fair 
competition amid private dominance —where Reliance Jio held 40.21% 
market share, Bharti Airtel 33.17%, and Vodafone Idea 17.67%. In response, 
the Department has informed that under Bharat Net  Phase-I, BSNL made 
1,04,146 GPs service -ready (99.9%) by laying 2,54,798 km of OFC. Under 

24 
 
Bharat Net Phase-II, 24,290 GPs (99%) were made service -ready with 75,881 
km of OFC laid. The Bharat Net-III project aims to cover all 6.4 lakh inhabited 
villages; agreements were signed for 6 of 16 tendered packages and 3 more 
are under process. BSNL has onboarded 41 lakh+ FTTH customers in 3,000+ 
towns and 46,000+ panchayats. In mobile services, BSNL has installed 
87,363 4G eNodeBs and 78,708 are on -air, with full rollout of 1 lakh sites 
expected by June , 2025; 22,000 more sites are planned, and 38,825 are 
upgradable to 5G. Under the 4G saturation project, 24,680 uncovered 
villages are to be connected via 16,464 mobile towers, with provisio n for 
4,936 more. As of January, 2025, 6,26,870 out of 6,44,131 villages are 
covered with mobile con nectivity. The Committee de sire that the 
Department expedite Bharat Net -III implementation, complete action on 
remaining tenders, strengthen BSNL’s fibre and mobile services, ensure 
universal connectivity by leveraging indigenous infrastructure, while 
upholding fair market competition, protecting consumer rights interests and 
furnish a definitive roadmap for successful completion of universal rural 
connectivity, ensuring digital access to all households in a time -bound and 
transparent manner.  The Committee note with concern that the 
Department’s reply was silent on the revival strategy for BSNL and MTNL.  
The Committee also reiterate their earlier recommendation that a 
comprehensive and time -bound strategic revival plan be formulated for 
BSNL and MTNL, focusing on service quality enhan cement, competitive 
tariff structures, and integration of digital services to make these entities 
operationally as well as financially  viable in the long term.  The progress 
made in this regard may be submitted to the Committee within six months of 
presentation of this Action Taken Report in Parliament.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
Budgetary Allocations and Utilizations during 2025-2026 
Budgetary Allocations and Utilizations 
 
 According to the detailed Demands for Grants laid by DoT, the Committee note 
that there have been significant variations in both Revenue and Capital Expenditure for 
the FY 2021 -22 to 2025 -26.  The revenue section reveals that the actu als peaked at 
Rs.66280.44 crores in 2022 -23 before declining sharply to Rs.33067.19 crores in 2023 -
24.  The actuals for the year 2024 -25 upto December was Rs.26864.48 crores while the 
Revised Estimates was Rs.57169.79 crores, suggesting that there may be a  shortfall in 
achieving the targets for 2024-25.  The projected revenue for 2025 -26 as per the Budget 
Estimate is Rs.35851.50 crores.  On the Capital Expenditure front, there has been a 
steep rise from Rs.6397.74 crores in 2021-22 to Rs.82646.52 crores in RE 2024-25.  The 
Committee also note that the actual spending upto December, 2024 has been 
Rs.7445.26 crores.  Further, the Budget Estimate (BE) capital outlay for 2025 -26 is 
Rs.73784.76 crores. As seen, the total financial outlay for both the Capital and Revenue 
expenditure has been fluctuating from Rs.139816.31 crores being the RE of 2024 -25 to 
Rs.109636.26 crores for 2025 -26.  The Committee opine that such fluctuations indicate 
inconsistencies in implementing the projects that are undertaken with long te rm 
commitment.  The Committee are of the view that the projections should confine to 
financial utilization of approved outlays as physical achievement of targets reflect realistic 
assessment. The Committee desire that the Department should ensure proper pl anning 
and management as there are significant variations at RE as well as actual 
implementation stages and also take prudent measures for effective utilization of the 
allocated funds. 
 
 The Committee note that the BE for FY 2024 -25 (Revenue) section was 
Rs.38475.54 crores which was increased to Rs.57169.79 cr ores in FY 2024-25 RE.  The 
2024-25 revenue expenditure which was revised upwards by nearly ₹19,000 crores mid -
year, signals inadequacy in initial projections. The Committee are of the considered view 
that budget estimation methods should be based on sound  financial principles and 
prudent commercial practices so as to are necessary  to prevent drastic fluctuations 
between BE and RE figures. More accurate forecasting and adequate planning  using 
data-driven financial modelling, historical expenditure trends, and anticipated sectoral 
needs can lead to better budgetary proposals. The Committee desire that the 
Department should focus on creating a  flexible contingency mechanism  that allows the 
reallocation of unspent funds to high -priority areas within the teleco m sector, ensuring 
that every rupee allocated contributes effectively to national digital infrastructure goals. 
 
 

26 
 
Reply of the Government 
 This is submitted that the sharp decline of the “Actuals” from Rs. 66,280.44 crores 
in 2022-23 to Rs.33,067.19 crores  in 2023-24 is due to the fact that an amount of Rs. 
50,000 Cr (Rs. 25,000 Cr in both Revenue and Capital) was allocated to “Transfer to 
USO fund” by MoF in March, 2023 which increased the expenditure by Rs. 25,000 cr.in 
Revenue Section. 
 
The actuals for the year 2024-25 upto March, 2025 for Revenue section is Rs.52,864.02 
crores against projected Revised Estimates Rs. Rs.57169.79 crores, i.e 92.47 % has 
been utilized in the FY 2024-25 in Revenue Section. 
 
On the Capital side, there has been a steep rise fr om Rs.6,397.74 crores in 2021 -22 to 
Rs.82,646.52 crores in RE 2024 -25 due to the amount allocated  in Capital Infusion in 
BSNL(Revival Plan to Support BSNL); Rs. 72,027.65 Cr in RE 2024 -25. As on 
31/03/2025, an amount of Rs. 78,992.31 Cr(95.58%) has been u tilized against projected 
amount of Rs. 82,646.52 Cr.    
 
Comparison of BE 24-25 and RE 24-25 
Increase in RE 2024 -25 in Revenue Section, Rs. (57169.79 -38475.54) Cr that is                
Rs.18694.25 Crores is due to effect of the following:- 
       (Rs. In Crores) 
Items BE 2024-25 RE 2024-25 Increase/Decrease 
Pension 17510 19306 (+)1796 
Transfer to USO Fund 1000 17500 (+)16500 
Implementation of VRS of 
BSNL& MTNL 
0.01 3822.16 (+)3822.15 
Compensation to Telecom 
Service Providers 
10100 7000 (-)3100 
Production Linked Incentive 
Scheme 
1806.34 1450.97 (-)355.37 
 
 
Comparison of RE 24-25 and BE 25-26 
 
RE 2024-25 allotted to the Department was Rs. 139816.31 crores which was decreased 
to Rs. 109636.26 crores in BE 2025-26.  
A decrease of Rs. (139816.31 -109636.26) Cr. that is Rs. 30180.05 Crores in BE 2025 —
26 w.r.t RE 2024-25 is due to effect of the following:- 
                                                                                                               (Rs. In Crores) 
Items RE 2024-25 BE 2025-26 Increase/Decrease 
Capital Infusion in BSNL 72027.65 33757.58 (-)38270.07 
Implementation of VRS of BSNL 
& MTNL 
3822.16 0.01 (-)3822.15 
Payment of Principal and 3980.71 0.00 (-)3980.71 

27 
 
Interest on MTNL Bonds 
Loans to MTNL on invocation of 
Government Guarantee 
1151.23 0.01 (-)1151.22 
Bharat Net 6500 22000 (+)15500 
Pension 19306 20133.42 (+)827.42 
Production Linked Incentive 
Scheme 
1450.97 1965.50 (+)514.53 
ITI Revival 59 105.50 (+)46.50 
 
Review Mechanism 
In this regard it is submitted that expenditure  utilisation is being monitored on a regular 
basis (Quarterly/ monthly) at the highest levels viz Secretary(T) and Member(F).  
 
All divisions discuss the pace of projects under them as well as expenditure plan for 
these project. Divisions are also advised to pace their expenditure throughout the year 
rather than utilising the same towards the fag end of the year. 
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 The Com mittee note that in respect of Capital allocation, the Department could 
only utilize less than one -tenth during FY 2024 -25 upto December, 2024.  While 
submitting the reasons, the Department has stated that spectrum cost of Rs.61799.62 
crores remained entir ely unspent.  Further, Optical Fibre Cable (OFC) network for 
Defence services had utilized only 34% of the allotted money  resulting in very less 
utilization in Capital allocation. Detailed examination has revealed that even though 
maximum share of budget allocation was for the revival plan of BSNL and MTNL its 
utilization has been very limited to the tune of 14%.  The spectrum fund had remained 
entirely unspent despite having highest allocation of Rs.61799.62 crores. The Committee 
observe that the spending pattern in Capital section has been in a  mixed execution pace 
with certain areas having full utilization while the progress in others is tardy.  The 
Committee further note with concern  that while  utilization in certain areas is 
encouraging, at the same  time while poor utilization in other areas needs attention in 
order to avoid the same during the Financial Year 2025 -26. Therefore, the Committee 
would like to call upon the Department for concerted efforts in these issues in order to 
ensure proper and effective utilization of precious fund. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The total actual expenditure of Capital section is Rs. 78,992.31 Crore as on 
31.03.2025 against allocation of Rs.82,646.52 in RE 2024-25 which is 95.58%. 
 
The shortfall of Rs. 3,654.21 Cr is mainly due to the following: 
 
                                                                                                   
 

28 
 
(Rs. In Crores) 
Name of the 
Scheme/Project 
RE 2024-25 Actual 2024 -
25 
Shortfall Reason 
Bharat Net 
 
6,500 
 
3,995.01 
 
2,504.99 
 
Delay in project 
implementation is because of 
multiple challenges in remote 
and far -flung rural areas, 
slow progress by 
implementing agencies. 
Under Amended Bharat Net 
Programme, out of 16 
packages floated by BSNL, 
only 6 packages were 
awarded in FY 25 lead ing to 
low expenditure under 
Amended Bharat Net. 
 
OFC Network for 
Defence Services 
 
1,315.96 
 
446.23 
 
869.73 
 
The payments for the NFS  
Project are released based 
on milestone achieved in the 
project. As informed by 
BSNL, there is delay in 
achieving miles tone for 
certain projects. 
Capital infusion in 
BSNL & MTNL 
 
72,027.65 
 
71,940.02 
 
87.63 
 
99.88% has been achieved 
as per requirement of BSNL. 
 
T-Cert 
 
167 
 
117 
 
50 
 
Many of the procurements 
were still under progress and 
require time to be converted 
into purchase orders. Hence 
certain payments spilled over 
into the next FY. 
 
Here it is also mentioned that, against allocation of Rs. 61,799.62 Cr in Spectrum, an 
amount of Rs. 61,711.99 Cr (99.86%) has been utilised as on 31-03-2025.  
 
The Department is cond ucting regular meetings to review the pace of expenditure at the 
highest levels. All divisions discuss the pace of projects under them as well as 
expenditure plan for these project. Divisions are also advised to pace their expenditure 
throughout the year rather than utilising the same towards the fag end of the year. 
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 

29 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 Noting the revenue expenditure pattern for FY 2023 -24 and 2024 -25, the 
Committee observe that there has been a significant shortfall in spending by the 
Department.  The BE for revenue expenditure in FY 2024-25 was revised to Rs.57169.79 
crores from Rs.38475.54 crores that was initially allocated.  However, u pto December, 
2024 only Rs.26864.48 crores had been spent which was less than 50%.  Reasons 
attributed for the shortfall in spending  have been that revised allocation of funds was 
done only in January, 2025 leaving limited time for effective utilization.  Further, for FY 
2025-26, the allocation has been reduced to Rs.35851.50 crores against the proposed 
revenue expenditure of Rs.42557.88 crores indicating the efforts to moderate 
expenditure based on previous under-utilization trends.  The Committee recommend that 
the Department may take suitable measures to improve financial planning and fund 
disbursement mechanism so as  to ensure that budget allocations are received well in 
advance. A more structured quarterly disbursement system with predictable allocatio n 
schedules can mitigate these issues and enable smoother execution of projects and 
expenditures. Additionally, process simplifications and better coordination between 
various stakeholders,  including telecom operators, infrastructure providers, and 
Government agencies, should be implemented to expedite fund absorption. Reducing 
bureaucratic delays in project approvals and fund release can enhance efficiency and 
prevent last-minute spending rushes, which often lead to suboptimal financial decisions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The total actual expenditure of Revenue section is Rs. 52,864.02 Crore as on 
31.03.2025 against allocation of Rs.57,169.79 in RE 2024-25 which is 92.47%. 
The shortfall is mainly due to the following items:- 
                                                                                                             (Rs. In Crores) 
Items RE 2024-
25 
Actuals as on 
31-03-2025 
Shortfall Reason 
Compensation to 
Telecom Service 
Provides 
7000 4643.08 2356.92 Digital Bharat Nidhi supports 
schemes in  areas where 
operators on their own 
commercial incentives do not 
find it viable due to difficulties 
in execution and low returns. 
There are many challenges in 
implementation of these 
projects like - widely dispersed 
locations across remote 
corners of the co untry, difficult 
terrains (including Hilly/ 
Rocky), difficulty in access of 
locations, Left Wing Extremism 
(LWE) affected areas, Right of 
Way (RoW) issues, lack of 
infrastructure and skilled 

30 
 
labour, difficulties in 
communication and 
transportation etc. 
Pension 19306 18228.71 1077.29 94.42% has been utilized. 
Production Linked 
Incentive Scheme 
1450.97 843.93 607.04 BE/ RE figures are based on 
the incentive against the sales 
forecast given by the 
companies at the time of initial 
approval. However, actual 
incentives vary depending on 
actual sales achieved by PLI 
company. Actual sales of the 
companies depend on various 
market forces and orders 
received by companies. 
International Co -
operation 
192.90 135.49 57.41 Less expenditure is due to  
i. the changes in r ental policy 
of ITPO. 
The finalized rental rates were 
significantly lower than the 
earlier estimated rates. 
ii. Further Host country 
contribution reduced due to 
adjustment from the previous 
contributions. 
iii. Exchange Rate fluctuations. 
iv. Here it is als o mentioned 
that some bills are still under 
process. 
 
 Steps taken to address utilisation of fund and monitoring mechanism:  
PLI 
i. To enhance utilization of funds, Department modified scheme guidelines and 
introduced quarterly disbursement of incentives. Quarterly disbursement of incentives 
will improve cash flow of companies and enable them to be more competitive.  
ii. To avoid any delay in disbursement of incentive, the Department has framed 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for processing of claims made by companies.  
iii. The process for disbursement of incentive is done through an online system ensuring 
monitoring of claims by the Ministry/Department. The scheme, including the 
disbursement of incentives, is also subjected to regular oversight at higher levels 

31 
 
within this Department, the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
and the Empowered Group of Secretaries. 
DBN 
iv. Digital Bharat Nidhi has implemented ‘Online Project Monitoring Information System’ 
for settlement of claims under DBN Schemes. Fu rther, to solve the various issues 
under the DBN’s Schemes, a Project Monitoring Units have been setup under DBN. 
A meeting to review the physical and financial progress of DBN’s Schemes are being 
taken with DBN’s Implementers on monthly and quarterly basis.  
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
 
 The main sources of revenue receipts of the De partment are License Fee, 
Spectrum Usage Charges and Spectrum Auction receipts.  The License Fee receipts has 
been Rs.16614.36 crores in 2021 -22, Rs.20316.28 crores in 2022 -23, Rs.36363.17 
crores in 2023 -24 and Rs.13991.41 crores in 2024 -25 upto 31.12.2024 .  The estimates 
for FY 2025 -26 has been Rs.27,300 crores.  Under the category of Specturm Usage 
Charges, the receipts has been Rs.7511.71 crores in FY 2021 -22, Rs.5743.62 in 2022 -
23, Rs.13065.18 in FY 2023-24 and Rs.2305.15 crores in 2024-25 upto 31.12.2024.  For 
FY 2025-26, the projected receipt is Rs.3500 crores.  Further, the details of receipt under 
Spectrum Auction Receipts are Rs. 60814.06 crores in FY 2021 -22, Rs.37816.00 crores 
in FY 2022-23, Rs.42617.89 crores in 2023 -24 and Rs.41452.56 crores in 2024-25 upto 
31.12.2024.  For FY 2025 -26 Rs.44744.27 crores is the estimated Spectrum Auction 
Receipts.  
While examining the factors affecting revenue receipts, the Department, inter -alia, 
submitted that revenue of telecom operators, regulatory policies, t echnological 
advancements such as  5G, 6G, market competition, subscriber growth and demands, 
pricing strategy, infrastructure etc. affect the revenue receipts.  Further, the Department 
submitted that as a part of telecom reforms, Spectrum Usage Charges(SU C) have been 
reduced to zero for the spectrum acquired through auction held in 2022 and subsequent 
years.  Furthermore, the Department submitted that reforms introduced in September, 
2021 are expected to decrease the cost of operations for TSPs, facilitate  foreign 
investment and increase ease of doing business for TSPs.  The Department also 
submitted that these reforms would also increase revenue for TSPs and thereby increase 
the AGR based revenue receipts of the Government of India.  Elaborating upon the steps 
taken by the Department to achieve targets during FY 2025 -26, the Department stated 
that the measures taken included (a) facility to make online paperless payments; (b) fully 
Digital and paperless submission of financial documents; (c) online grievanc e resolution 

32 
 
process; and (d) and continuous monitoring of receipts of spectrum deferred instalments 
and spectrum usage charges.  The Committee hope that these measures taken by the 
Department would augment the revenue receipts and achieve the intended obj ectives.  
The Committee urge the Department to periodically monitor the effectiveness of the 
measures that are being put in place for increasing revenue receipts. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Department has taken following measures to digitize, standardize and  streamline the 
LF/SUC Assessment related workflows for all the stakeholders  so as to ensure accurate 
and timely assessment thereby improving public revenues and overall growth of telecom 
sector with better infrastructure planning and management. 
1. A Revenue  Management Software SARAS (System for Assessment of LF 
Revenue and SUC) has been implemented, which has digitised the  assessments, 
payment and accounting of license fees, spectrum usage charges etc. along with 
all ancillary processes 
2. SARAS enables the Lic ensee to make online payments, digitally file and verify 
deduction claims, AGR statements, bank guarantee details  along with  enabling 
the Department to conduct online assessment of LF and SUC, management of 
bank guarantees, handle representations etc. 
3. SARAS also incorporates features for grievance management and knowledge 
sharing for facilitating better communication amongst the department and the 
licensees. It also provides email and SMS alerts to the users for ensuring timely 
action on the respective tasks. 
4. The Department has started Telecom Facilitation Centre to assist various 
stakeholder like startups, MSMEs, academia, licensees, registration holders etc. 
in not only navigating regulatory processes but also handholding for various 
schemes of the department and fostering innovation. 
 
5. Department has been hand holding licensees for on -boarding on SARAS portal 
and making submissions / payments through Telecom Outreach Programs (TOP). 
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 On the issue of auction of Spectrum , the Committee wish to draw attention of the 
Ministry to the CAG Report No. 20 of 2015 wh ich raised significant concerns about the 
lack of due diligence in the auction of spectrum for Broadband Wireless Access (BWA) 
services, particularly highlighting deficiencies in the Notice Inviting Applications (NIA). 

33 
 
The NIA allowed UAS, CMTS, and ISP op erators to bid for the same BWA spectrum, 
despite their licenses governing the usage of the spectrum differently. This created 
confusion and potential misuse of the spectrum. Post -auction, M/s Infotel (now Reliance 
Jio Infocomm) requested network codes to offer voice services beyond the scope of their 
ISP license. The Department of Telecommunications (DoT) facilitated this request by 
allowing Infotel to migrate to a Unified License at prices set in 2001, granting them an 
undue financial advantage of ₹3,367.29 crore. Additionally, despite the auction occurring, 
the rollout of BWA services remained negligible, raising concerns about the effectiveness 
of the auction process. To address these issues in future, the Committee recommend 
that the NIA framewo rk for spectrum auctions be more clearly defined, particularly 
regarding the scope of spectrum usage for different classes of licensees. This would 
prevent ambiguity and ensure that only operators with the appropriate licenses and 
requirements can bid for specific spectrum bands. The Committee further recommend 
that migration pricing for operators should be aligned with current market rates to prevent 
financial advantages that are not justifiable. A robust mechanism for monitoring the 
progress of service ro llouts should also be put in place, with penalties for delays to 
ensure that the spectrum is utilized efficiently. In addition, a post -auction review 
mechanism should be established to ensure that operators use the spectrum according 
to the terms of the au ction. The Committee are of the view that increasing transparency 
in the auction process, with clear communication to stakeholders, would enhance public 
confidence and ensure the process is fair and effective and implementing these 
measures would make spec trum auctions more transparent, efficient, and beneficial for 
all stakeholders including for the consumers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Department has taken following measures to ensure transparency and clear 
communication with stakeholders. 
1. The details of auction are transparently placed in public domain through a ‘Notice 
Inviting Applications’ (NIA). 
2. The auction process is open to all potential bidders on a non-discriminatory basis.  
3. The details regarding IEMs (Independent External Monitors) are also provide d in 
NIA.    
4. The issue of Notice Inviting Applications (NIA) is published/advertised in two 
English and two Hindi Newspapers along with publishing on DoT website. 
5. The process allows for queries to be raised by potential bidders, and such 
concerns are addre ssed through a ‘Queries and Responses’ document which is 
also placed on Department of Telecommunications (DoT’s) website. 
6. List of the Applicants & Ownership Details of the applicants, List of pre -qualified 
Bidders, and List of Final Bidders are published o n DoT Website as per the 
timelines mentioned in the NIA. 
7. At the end of each day of the auction, details of clock rounds completed, 
aggregate demand and provisional bidding price are put up on DoT’s website. 
8. Provisional Result and Frequency Assignment Repor t are also published on the 
DoT Website on the final day of the auction. Details of clock rounds completed, 
aggregate demand and provisional bidding price are put up on DoT’s website. 

34 
 
9. Back up of all the auction data including bids received in each round is  done in 
real time and is available for subsequent analysis and audit – audit trail provided 
by the auctioneer. 
10.  A robust mechanism has been put in place for monitoring the progress of rollouts 
obligations and ensuring effective use of spectrum resources w ithin scope 
detailed in NIA. 
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
Universal Service Obligation Fund(USOF) was created  w.e.f 1.4.2002 in pursuance of  
The Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003 to provide financial support to the telecom 
service in commercially unviable rural and remote areas of the country.  This is an 
attached office of DoT headed by an Administrator appointed by the Central 
Government.  With effect from 26.06.2024, USOF has been renamed as Digital Bharat 
Nidhi(DBN).  As per the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, Licence Fee includes Universal 
Access Levy which is charged at the rate of 5% of the adjusted Gross Revenue of the 
telecom licences.  The fund collected under UAL goes to the Consolidated Fund of India 
and it is non-lapsable in nature.  The outflow from Consolidated Fund of India to USOF is 
through regulatory provisions of the Ministry of Finance each year based on requirement 
of USOF.  T he Department has submitted that since inception of the then USOF in FY 
2002-03 and subsequent renaming as DBN on 26.6.2024, UAL amounting upto 
Rs.171590.68 crores has been collected upto 31.12.2024.  The balance of UAL amount 
available as on 31.12.2024 is  Rs.86359.77 crores.  Further, the Department has stated 
that the Government has approved committed expenditure of Rs.1.3 lakh crores for 
Bharat Net Scheme for next 10 years on 04.08.2023 alongwith other committed liabilities 
for other ongoing schemes.  Wh ile reviewing the performance of the schemes under 
DBN, the Committee note that under amended Bharat Net Programme, BSNL has given 
notice for inviting tenders for selection of Project Implementing Agency(PIA).  The 
selection of PIA is for development (crea tion, upgradation, operation and maintenance) 
of Middle -mile Network of Bharat Net on Design, Build, Operate and Maintain Model.  
The Department has submitted that RFP was floated by BSNL for selection of Project 
Implementation Agencies(PIAs) for 16 packag es(excluding Eight State led Model states) 
on 15.02.2024 and out of 16 packages that were opened on 07.08.2024, advance work 
order for 6 packages have been issued and further Master Service Agreement has been 
signed between BSNL and respective PIAs for thr ee packages and evaluation of 
remaining packages are ongoing.  RFP for selection of Independent Engineer (04 
packages) for overseeing work of PIAs in 16 packages was opened on 15.10.2024 and 
RFP for Independent Engineer (02 packages) for overseeing work of  PIAs in Eight 
packages (under State led model) was opened on 18.10.2024.  Technical bids are under 
evaluation. 
 Submitting information on Mobile Projects, the Department has stated that the 
delay in installation and supply of indigenously developed and do mestically 
manufactured equipment is the main cause for the shortfall in schemes namely 4G 

35 
 
Saturation Scheme and LBE Phase -I upgradation, Border Out Post(BOP)/Border 
Intelligence Post(BIP) etc. The Department has submitted that in order to achieve the 
targets , multi cornered approach has been taken up at various levels for resolution of 
issues in the projects and for resolving roadblocks if any and also assisting in getting 
clearances for projects.  The Committee urge the Department to finalise the technic al 
bids which are under evaluation at the earliest and ensure periodic monitoring and 
expeditious implementation of amended Bharat Net Programme . With Further, the 
Committee are of the considered opinion that the initiatives of the Department would 
fructify and intended objectives would be successfully achieved. The Committee may be 
apprised of the result. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The progress made and measure taken by the Department for effective 
implementation of DBN Projects are as under: 
  
(i) Saturation of 4G mobile services in uncovered villages across the country: The Union 
Cabinet on 27.07.2022 approved an USOF funded project for saturation of 4G mobile 
services in uncovered villages across the country at a total cost of Rs. 26,316 Cr.   The 
project will provide 4G mobile services in 24,680 uncovered villages in remote and 
difficult areas. The project has a provision to include additional villages on account of 
rehabilitation, new -settlements, withdrawal of services by existing operators etc.   In 
addition, 6,279 villages having only 2G/3G connectivity shall be upgraded to 4G.  The 
revised Project Cost is Rs. 30620.49 crore.  
Agreement has been signed with BSNL on 06.02.2023. Further, rollout period has been 
extended upto June, 2025. As on April, 2025,  total 17,220 towers including upgradation 
of 654 towers have been planned. Out of which 11,139 towers have been made on air 
covering 15,249 villages..  
  
(ii). Border Out Posts (BOPs) and Border Intelligence Posts (BIPs) Project: The Union 
Cabinet on 24.0 3.2023 has approved the Project for the Provision of 4G based mobile 
services at 1,117 locations of Border Out Posts (BOPs) of BGFs and Border Intelligence 
Posts (BIPs) of IB on nomination basis to BSNL. 72 additional locations were also 
forwarded by MHA have been added in the schemes. As on April, 2025, 92 towers have 
been installed and providing coverage at 140 Posts.  
  
(iii) Amended Bharat Net Programme: Amended Bharat Net Programme (ABP) targets to 
provide high speed broadband connectivity to all inhab ited villages in the country. BSNL 
has been appointed Project Management Agency (PMA) for Amended Bharat Net  
Project.  BSNL has put notice inviting tender (NIT) for selection of Project Implementing 
Agency (PIA) for Development (creation, upgradation, oper ation & maintenance) of 
middle mile network of Bharat Net on Design Build Operate and Maintain (DBOM) model 
for sixteen packages. 
Under Amended Bharat Net Programme, following measures have been taken: 
i. Technical and Financial bids are opened. Advance work order has been 
issued by PMA i.e. BSNL for Twelve Packages (namely UP(E), UP(W), 

36 
 
Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Bihar, West Bengal, Andaman and Nicobar, 
MP, Uttaranchal & J&K, Ladakh, Karnataka, Puducherry, Goa, NE -II 
(Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland), Ker ala and rest are under 
process. Out of which, Agreement has been signed by BSNL for Six 
Packages (namely UP(E), UP(W), Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Bihar,West 
Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar).  
ii. RFP for C -NoC was released on 01.01.2025 and BSNL has issued amend ment 
on 28.03.2025 and Last date of Bid submission is 19.05.2025. 
iii. To ensure periodic monitoring and expeditious implementation of Amended 
Bharat Net Programme , PMA i.e. BSNL for ABP is developing the Project 
Monitoring Tool which inter -alia includes milest one details & achievement, 
inventory management, etc.  
   
The details of Funds allocation and utilization during FY 2024 -25 for various 
DBN’s Schemes are as under:  
                                                                         (Rs in crores) 
Name of Scheme BE allotted RE allotted Fund Disbursed 
(as on 31.03.2025) 
Bharat Net 8500 6500 3995.01 
Other DBN’s Projects 10500 7200 4803.15 
Total 19000 13700 8798.16 
  
In current FY 2025 -26, BE of Rs. 28,400 crores have been allotted includes Rs. 
22,000 crores for Bharat Net  (Capital Head) and Rs. 6,400 cro res for Other DBN's 
Schemes (Revenue Head).  
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.7) 
 
 
 The C ommittee note that budget execution for both Capital and Revenue 
Expenditure in the Department of Telecommunications (DoT) highlights significant gaps 
in fund utilization across key telecom infrastructure projects. The RE for CAPEX 
Expenditure for FY 2024 -25 is Rs 8609 Cr and the expenditure till 07.02.2025 is Rs. 
8609 Cr indicating 100 percent utilisation. Under the head Pensions, the RE 2024 -25 
was Rs 23,128 Cr , the expenditure till 07.02.2025 was  Rs 18,1864 Cr amounting to 82 
% of fund utilization.  Un der Bharat Net , the RE for FY 2024 -25 was  Rs 6,500 Cr and 
the expenditure till 07.02.2025 is Rs 3,145 Cr amounting to 48% of fund utilization,  the 
RE for FY 2024 -25  for OFC Network for Defence was Rs 1316 Cr,  the expenditure till 
07.02.2025 is Rs 448 cr amounting to 34% of fund utilization, the RE for 2024 -25  for 

37 
 
Training (NICF Building)was Rs 25 cr  and the expenditure till 07.02.2025 is Rs 15 cr 
amounting to 60% of fund utilization, the RE for 2024 -25  for PLI Scheme  was Rs 1451 
cr and  the expendi ture till 07.02.2025 is Rs 111 cr amounting to a meagre 8% of fund 
utilization.The Committee note with serious concern that overall, only 18% of the total 
revised capital budget and 75% of the revenue budget have been utilized, underscoring 
execution bottlenecks that need urgent attention and  resolution. 
 The Committee note that the mixed spending patterns in key telecom projects 
indicate project implementation delays, procurement inefficiencies, administrative 
bottlenecks, and inadequate absorption capacity in critical areas such as Bharat Net and 
telecom R&D. The Committee is particularly concerned about the abysmal low utilization 
of funds in the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme (8%) and International 
Cooperation (21%), as these initiatives are e ssential for strengthening indigenous 
telecom manufacturing and enhancing India’s global presence in the sector. 
 In view of above challenges, the Committee recommend for immediate resolution 
of bottlenecks in Spectrum Allocation and Bharat Net Execution. The slow pace of fund 
utilization in Bharat Net (48%) highlights delays in project implementation, which directly 
affects last -mile connectivity in rural areas. The Committee recommend that the 
Department of Telecommunications (DoT) establish a quarterly monitoring mechanism to 
track Bharat Net’s progress, ensuring timely approvals, faster clearance of Right of Way 
(RoW) permissions, and streamlined coordination with State Governments. Additionally, 
the Committee urge the DoT to explore public -private partn erships and innovative 
funding models to accelerate infrastructure deployment.  The Committee are of the 
considered view that addressing the bottlenecks would definitely enhance Bharat Net’s 
execution efficiency and ensure the timely realization of India’s digital connectivity goals. 
Reply of the Government 
 In this regard it is submitted that an amount of Rs. 52,864.02 Cr against RE 2024 -
25 Rs. 57,169.79 Cr (92.47%) in revenue section and an amount of Rs. 78,992.31 Cr 
against RE 2024 -25 Rs. 82,646.52 Cr (9 5.58%) in Capital Section has been utilized in 
the FY 2024-25. 
 The RE 2024 -25, Actuals and Shortfall (if any) of the items mentioned in   
Recommendation No -7 are appended below:   
                                                                                                     (Rs. In Crores) 
Item RE 2024-25 Actuals 2024-25 Shortfall 
Pension 19,306 18,228.71 1,077.29 
Bharat Net 6,500 3,995.01 2,504.99 
OFC Network for Defence 
Services 
1,315.96 446.23 869.73 
NICF (NCA-F) building  24.58 18.94 5.64 
Production Linked 
incentive Scheme 
1,450.97 843.93 607.04 
International Co-operation 192.90 135.49 57.41 

38 
 
 
Reasons for less expenditure under various schemes/ projects is as under: 
 
1) DBN Schemes: 
 
 The budgetary estimates for Digital Bharat Nidhi prepared on the basis of physical 
targets of Schemes and funds are being disbursed on the basis of physical progress and 
as per the Terms and Conditions of the Agreement signed with DBN’s Implementers. 
Digital Bharat Nidhi supports schemes in areas where operators on their own commercial 
incentives do not find it viable due to difficulties in execution and low returns. There are 
many challenges in implementation of these projects like - widely dispersed locations 
across remote corners of the country, difficult terrain s (including Hilly/ Rocky), difficulty in 
access of locations, Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas, Right of Way (RoW) 
issues, lack of infrastructure and skilled labor, difficulties in communication and 
transportation etc. The challenges are being ove rcome by proper planning, coordination 
with all stake holders, constant discussions with DoT field units, State/UT Administration 
and Forest Department. To fast -track approval of RoW issue, the process has been 
made online. Further, regular review meetings  are being carried out with concerned 
Central/State Agencies and other stake holders to resolve any issues. Additional steps 
like appointment of Third -Party Audit, setup of Project Monitoring Unit, Online Project 
Monitoring Information System, has been taken by the DBN.  
 
i. Amended Bharat Net Programme : Bharat Net  project is being implemented in a 
phased manner to provide broadband connectivity to all the Gram Panchayats (GPs) and 
villages, including tribal areas. The infrastructure created under Bharat Net project is a 
national asset, accessible on a non -discriminatory basis to the Service Providers, and 
the same can be utilized to provide broadband services through FTTH connections, 
leased lines, dark fibre, backhaul to mobile towers, etc.  
 
The Union Cab inet accorded its approval on 04.08.2023 regarding Amended 
Bharat Net Programme  to provide high speed broadband connectivity to all inhabited 
villages in the country. The salient features are: 
 
The Amended Bharat Net Programme  targets to provide high speed  broadband 
connectivity to all inhabited villages in the country. The Project will be fully funded 
through Digital Bharat Nidhi (DBN), DoT at an estimated cost of INR 1,39,579 crore. The 
amount is Rs 1.88 lakh crores including the outlay for Phase -I and Ph ase-II. BSNL has 
been appointed as Project Management Agency (PMA) for ABP. BSNL has put notice 
inviting tender (NIT) for selection of Project Implementing Agency (PIA) for Development 
(creation, upgradation, operation & maintenance) of middle mile network  of Bharat Net 
on Design Build Operate and Maintain (DBOM) model for sixteen packages on 
15.02.2024 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
ii. The status of implementation of ABP: 
 
i. Technical and Financial bids are opened. Advance work order has been issued by 
PMA i.e. BSNL for Twelve Packag es (namely UP(E), UP(W), Himachal Pradesh, 
Punjab, Bihar, West Bengal, Andaman and Nicobar, MP, Uttaranchal & J&K, 
Ladakh, Karnataka, Puducherry, Goa, NE -II (Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, 
Nagaland), Kerala and rest are under process. Out of which, Agreement has been 
signed by BSNL for Six Packages (namely UP(E), UP(W), Himachal Pradesh, 
Punjab, Bihar, West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar).  
 
ii. RFP for C -NoC was released on 01.01.2025 and BSNL has issued amendment 
on 28.03.2025 and Last date of Bid submission is 19.05.2025. 
 
iii. Measures taken for effective implementation of ABP:  
 
a. For the overall stock of Bharat Net implementation status, resolution of issues and 
inter agency coordination, etc., Empowered Committee for ABP have been 
constituted.  
b. For the review and m onitoring of Bharat Net Project execution / O&M / Utilization 
and related issues, resolving operational, contractual issues etc., Steering 
Committee for Amended Bharat Net Programme has been constituted. 
c. BSNL has been appointed as Project Management Agency  (PMA) for this 
Program and shall select Project Implementing Agency (PIA), who shall 
implement this program on Design, Build, Operate & maintain (DBOM) model 
through competitive bidding and shall maintain network for Ten years. 
d. Vide DBN letter dated 10.01 .2025, Ministries/Department, State/UTs, were 
requested to issue necessary directions to all concerned stakeholders; to grant 
RoW permission for expeditious rollout and faster implementation of ABP in their 
state/UT. 
e. To ensure periodic monitoring and exped itious implementation of ABP, PMA is 
developing the Project Monitoring Tool which inter -alia includes milestone details 
& achievement, inventory management, etc. 
  
 Several measures to streamline internal processes and improve fund disbursal 
mechanisms hav e been taken by DBN. This includes the introduction of standardized 
documentation, clearer evaluation timelines, and simplified administrative procedures to 
ensure timely approvals and reduce turnaround time.  
 
2) OFC Network for Defence Services 
 
 As submitted by BSNL, fund requirement of Rs.1315.96 Crore was sent for 2024 -
25 in anticipation that payment milestones would be achieved, and vendors would submit 
milestone wise invoices . BSNL has further submitted that there is a delay in achieving 
milestones for certain projects. It was expected that all UNMS building (13) would be 
completed and all equipment to be installed in theses building and integrated and 

40 
 
payment would be released. But still 4 main buildings are yet to be completed. Similarly, 
under DWDM Pr oject, BSNL has stated that it was anticipated that Regional and 
National Acceptance testing will be completed, and respective payment milestones 
would be achieved but DWDM is a Tri -Service component and India Air Force is yet to 
sign the AT certificates.  
3) NCA-F (Formerly NICF) building 
(i) Release of funds was based on revised amount as intimated by CPWD. 
4) Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme 
 
i. The reported utilization appears low primarily because companies are required to 
submit their claims based on audited financial statements, which are typically filed 
in December of the following financial year. Consequently, disbursements are 
concentrated towards the end of the financial year.  
ii. In the FY 2024 -25, DoT has disbursed Rs. 843.95 Cr, around 58% of the RE(no t 
8%). 
iii. It is also submitted that the BE/ RE figures are based on the incentive against the 
sales forecast given by the companies at the time of initial approval. However, 
actual incentives vary depending on actual sales achieved by PLI company. 
Actual sale s of the companies depend on various market forces and orders 
received by companies.  
 
5) International Co-operation  
An amount of Rs. 135.49 Cr against RE 2024-25 of Rs. 192.90 Cr i.e 70.24 % has 
been utilized in International Co-operation. The reason for the shortfall is 
mentioned below: 
I. The expenditure of WTSA in F.Y. 2024 -25 was about Rs. 109 crore instead of 
the envisaged Rs. 132 crore due to changes in rental policy of ITPO and 
advance payment of amount Rs. 4.85 crore to ITPO in FY 2023-24. Further, no 
other envisaged International Conference could take place in F.Y. 2024-25. 
II. Some bills of WTSA related activities are still under process and could not be 
cleared by March 2025. 
III. As per the Host Country Agreement a contribution of Rs. 14 Cr. approximately, 
has to be given to the ITU in the current financial year for the Biennial 
contribution to ITU for the establishment of ITU Area Office and Innovation 
Centre, New Delhi. However, as per the terms and conditions of HCA, ITU Area 
Office and Innovation Centre ha s submitted the invoice for the contribution of 
CHF 501170.05 (Rs. 4,94,48,740/ -) after adjusting the unutilized amount by 
ITU from the previous contribution. 
IV. A formal rent agreement was finalized on 4th March 2025 regarding the 
expenditure for the rental amount of the ITU Area Office and Innovation Centre 
in the campus of C -DOT, New Delhi. The finalized rental rates were 

41 
 
significantly lower than the earlier estimated rates, leading to a reduced 
expenditure. Payments were made as per  the revised rates, after adjusting the 
excess amount paid in the previous financial year. 
 
V. Due to Exchange Rate fluctuations. 
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 (Recommendation Sl. No.8) 
 Strengthening Fund Absorption Capacity in R&D and the PLI Scheme 
 The Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme, meant to boost telecom 
manufacturing, has seen only 8% utilization, raising concerns about low industry 
participation. Similarly, research and development all ocations, such as DBN R&D – 
TTDF , the RE for FY 2024-25 was Rs 200 cr, the expenditure till 07.02.2025 is Rs. 99 cr   
i.e., less than (50%) only. The Committee recommend the DoT to review and revamp the 
PLI Scheme’s disbursement model in order  to ensure that funds reach eligible 
manufacturers on time. The eligibility criteria may be simplified, and incentive structures 
be strengthened to encourage maximum MSMEs to participate in telecom equipment 
production. Additionally, the Committee recommend for wider  collaboration with 
academic institutions and startups to accelerate telecom R&D and also ensure that funds 
allocated for innovation and larger productivity are fully utilized within the fiscal year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Status for PLIA.)    Status of BE, RE and utilization for the FY2024-2025: 
Under the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for telecom and networking 
products, the status of BE, RE and utilization for the FY2024-2025 is as below: 
  (In Rs. Crore) 
Scheme BE RE Utilization during FY 2 4-
25 
PLI Scheme for Telecom 
and Networking 
Products 
1806.34 1450.97 843.93 
During the current financial year (FY), the utilization under the PLI Scheme has been 
around 58% of RE. 
B.)  Steps taken to address utilisation of fund and encourage MSMEs participation: 
 
i. To enhance utilisation of funds, Department modified scheme guidelines and 
introduced quarterly disbursement of incentives. Quarterly disbursement of 

42 
 
incentives will improve cash flow of companies and enable them to be more 
competitive.  
ii. To avoid any delay in disbursement of incentive, the Department has framed 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for processing of claims made by 
companies.  
iii. The process for disbursement of incentive is done through an online system 
ensuring monitoring of claims by th e Ministry/Department. The scheme, including 
the disbursement of incentives, is also subjected to regular oversight at higher 
levels within this Department, the Department for Promotion of Industry and 
Internal Trade and the Empowered Group of Secretaries. 
iv. There is provision of 1% higher incentive for MSME for first 3 years to encourage 
participation of MSMEs. 
v. Out of total 42 approved beneficiaries, 28 companies are MSMEs. 
 Status for TTDF During FY 2024 -25, Rs. 200 cr have been allocated as RE 
against which Rs. 160.07 crore have been disbursed.  
Several measures to streamline internal processes and improve fund disbursal 
mechanisms have been taken by DBN. This includes the introduction of standardized 
documentation, clearer evaluation timelines, and simplif ied administrative procedures to 
ensure timely approvals and reduce turnaround time.  
To further enhance fund absorption and strengthen the impact of indigenous telecom 
R&D, Department is actively working towards expanding the scope of the TTDF scheme 
by launching new program verticals and supporting a wider range of projects. Additional 
calls for proposals are being planned in strategic technology areas to enable greater 
participation from startups, academic institutions, and industry. This will ensure bro ader 
outreach and more inclusive innovation in line with national priorities. Further, the TTDF 
division has launched a real -time dashboard to effectively monitor the progress of the 
approved projects so that timely measures are taken to eliminate bottlenecks. 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
Quarterly Expenditure Monitoring and Flexible Reallocation Mechanism 
  As per details furnished by the Departmen t  during FY 2024 -25 out of the RE of 
Rs 72,028 cr for  Revival plan of BSNL and MTNL, Rs 10,228 cr has been spent till 
07.02.2025 amounting to just 14 percent fund utilization. While the expenditure  under 
CAPEX for RE 2024 -25 was Rs 8609 cr,  the full am ount has been spent till 07.02.2025 
and under the Head ,spectrum cost,  out of Rs 61,799.62 cr , NIL amount has been 
spent. The Department have stated that an amount of Rs. 61,799.62 crores pertaining to 
Capital infusion of BSNL(for spectrum allocation) wi ll be utilized in the month of March, 
2025. 

43 
 
  Examining the submissions by the Department  the Committee find  that certain 
projects, such as the Revival Plan for BSNL & MTNL, show full utilization in some areas 
but  at the same time non - underutilization in others (e.g., Spectrum Cost 0%, AGR dues 
100%). This highlights the need for better budgetar y planning and real -time fund 
reallocation to avoid fund stagnation in unutilized areas.  
The Committee recommend for the institutionalization of a quarterly expenditure review 
mechanism to identify non -utilized funds and undertake proactive reallocation to  high-
priority projects like Bharat Net, Defence OFC, and the PLI Scheme. This review may be 
conducted in collaboration with the Ministry of Finance, enabling real -time corrective 
measures rather than hasty year -end reappropriations. The Committee also rec ommend 
for  creating an expenditure dashboard that tracks fund utilization across all major 
schemes, ensuring full transparency and accountability so that telecom infrastructure 
projects achieve their intended goals within the allocated timeframe, wipe out  financial 
inefficiencies, and strengthen India's digital and strategic communication capabilities. 
Reply of the Government 
 In this regard it is submitted that expenditure utilisation is being monitored on a 
regular basis (Quarterly/ monthly) at the highe st levels viz Secretary(T) and Member(F). 
All divisions discuss the pace of projects under them as well as expenditure plan for 
these project. Divisions are also advised to pace their expenditure throughout the year 
rather than utilising the same towards t he fag end of the year. Project/ Scheme wise 
inputs are given below: 
Capital Infusion in BSNL 
 During FY 2024 -25, BSNL has been allocated RE of Rs. 72,028 Crore details of 
which is as under: 
 
Capital Infusion in BSNL (FY 2024-25) 
SI.  No. Particulars Amt. (Rs. Crore) 
1 AGR Dues 1,619.03 
2 CAPEX 8,609.00 
3 Spectrum Charges 61,799.62 
  Total 72,027.65 
 
 There has been a delay in 4G roll out in BSNL, however in the CAPEX meeting 
with DOT, it was decided to utilize CAPEX support toward spectrum in the cur rent 
financial year itself up to March -25. Spectrum Payment of Rs. 61,711.99 Crore was 
received on 21.03.2025 and was subsequently paid on 02.04.2025 after receipt of DoT 
approval of “acceptance of right issue “on dated 01.04.20Z5. 
 Further, monitoring of CAPEX is being done at regular intervals by BSNL and the 
same has been regularly reported to DoT at the Dashboard Levels during the year 

44 
 
PLI 
 
Under the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for telecom and networking 
products, the status of BE, RE and utilization for the FY2024-2025 is as below: 
 
         (In Rs. Crore) 
Scheme BE RE Utilization during FY 24 -
25 
PLI Scheme for Telecom 
and Networking 
Products 
1806.34 1450.97 843.93 
During the current financial year (FY), the utilization under the PLI Sche me has been 
around 58% of RE. 
DBN 
With regard to above observation of Committee, it is submitted that to ensure periodic 
monitoring and expeditious implementation of ABP, PMA is developing the Project 
Monitoring Tool which inter -alia includes milestone det ails & achievement, inventory 
management, etc. Additional steps like setup of Project Monitoring Unit, Online Project 
Monitoring Information System, has been taken by the DBN. 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
Bharat Net  project is being implemented in a phased manner to provide 
broadband connectivity to all Gram Panchayats in the country. Under the project, 
network infrastructure is being created in pa rtnership with States and the private sector  
as a national asset for Broadband Highways, accessible on a non -discriminatory basis, 
to provide affordable broadband services to citizens and institutions in rural areas,. 
According to the Department, the rema ining work of Bharat Net Phase-I and Phase-II is 
expected to be completed in current financial year i.e., 2024-25. 
The Phase -I of the project has been implemented through GPON (Gigabit 
Passive Optical Network) technology by using existing fibre of Central Public Sector 
Undertakings (CPSUs) - Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL), RailTel Corporation 
Limited (RailTel) and Power Grid Corporation of India Limited (PGCIL) for laying 
underground incremental fibre to bridge the connectivity gap up to the GPs. The P hase-I 
was completed in December 2017 with the implementation of over 1 lakh GPs. 
Subsequently, the scope of Phase -I has been enhanced to the revised work -front of 
about 1.20 lakh. As on 20.01.2025 by laying 3,12,449 km Optical Fibre Cable (OFC), 
total 1,20,179 GPs have been made Service Ready under Phase-I (Revised work front). 

45 
 
         For expediting the implementation of Bharat Net , the Department has submitted 
that a modified strategy was approved by Cabinet on 19.07.2017 at an estimated cost of 
Rs. 42, 068 crore, which provides an optimal mix of media (OFC/Radio/satellite) to 
connect Gram Panchayats (GPs), multiple implementation models - State-led Model, 
Private Sector through BBNL and CPSU Model through BSNL/PGCIL, provision of Last 
Mile connectivity ( e.g. through Wi -Fi) in GPs, etc. As on 20.01.2025 under Bharat Net 
Phase II, by laying 3,80,250 km of Optical Fibre Cable (OFC), 89,112 GPs have been 
made Service Ready. Further, 5,032 GPs have been made Service Ready on Satellite 
media. In total, 94,144 GPs have been made Service Ready under the Bharat Net under 
Phase-II in the Country. 
On the overall progress of Bharat Net (Phase-I + Phase-II), the Department have 
informed that 2,09,291 GPs have been made Service Ready on OFC media by laying 
6,92,699 km o f Optical Fibre Cable (OFC) as on 20.01.2025. Further, 5,032 GPs have 
been made Service Ready on Satellite media. Total 2,14,323 GPs have been made 
Service Ready under the Bharat Net project in the Country. 
 
The Department have further stated that  Bharat Net connectivity in remaining 
47,000 GPs (including satellite GPs) has been planned under Amended Bharat Net 
Programme for which RFP is under progress in BSNL.  The Committee observe that the 
implementation of Bharat Net  Project has faced challenges on acco unt of covering 
difficult terrains (including Hilly/Rocky), Right of Way(RoW) issues and also difficulty in 
accessing Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas resulting in shortfall of targets 
fixed.  Hence it is being continuously revisited and revised.  The Committee desire the 
RFP to be completed in a time bound manner.  They hope that the measures taken to 
address the above issues would enable effective implementation of the Project and 
achieve the intended targets.  The Committee may be apprised of the  outcomes of the 
efforts of the Department. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Bharat Net  project is being implemented in a phased manner to provide 
broadband connectivity to all the Gram Panchayats (GPs) and villages, including tribal 
areas. The infrastructure created under Bharat Net project is a national asset, accessible 
on a non -discriminatory basis to the Service Providers, and the same can be utilized to 
provide broadband services through FTTH connections, leased lines, dark fibre, 
backhaul to mobile towers, etc.  
 
 Status of Bharat Net Phase-I and II:  Regarding the overall progress of Bharat 
Net (Phase-I + Phase-II), 2,09,291 GPs have been made Service Ready on OFC media 
by laying 6,93,281 km of Optical Fibre Cable (OFC) as on 05.05.2025. Further, 5,034 
GPs have been made Service Ready on Satellite media. Total 2,14,325 GPs have been 
made Service Ready under the Bharat Net project in the country. 
 
The Union Cabinet accorded its approval on 04.08.2023 for Amended Bharat Net 
Programme to provide high speed broadb and connectivity to all inhabited villages in the 

46 
 
country. The Amended Bharat Net Programme targets to provide high speed broadband 
connectivity to all inhabited villages in the country. The Project will be fully funded 
through Digital Bharat Nidhi (DBN), DoT at an estimated cost of INR 1,39,579 crore. The 
amount is Rs 1.88 lakh crores including the outlay for Phase -I and Phase -II. BSNL has 
been appointed as Project Management Agency (PMA) for ABP. 
 
Present Status of Amended Bharat Net Programme: 
i. Technical and Financial bids are opened. Advance work order has been issued by 
PMA i.e. BSNL for Twelve Packages (namely UP(E), UP(W), Himachal Pradesh, 
Punjab, Bihar, West Bengal, Andaman and Nicobar, MP, Uttaranchal & J&K, 
Ladakh, Karnataka, Puducherry, Goa, NE -II (Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, 
Nagaland), Kerala and rest are under process. Out of which, Agreement has been 
signed by BSNL for Six Packages (namely UP(E), UP(W), Himachal Pradesh, 
Punjab, Bihar,West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar).  
ii. RFP for C -NoC was rele ased on 01.01.2025 and BSNL has issued amendment 
on 28.03.2025 and Last date of Bid submission is 19.05.2025. 
 
Measures taken for effective implementation of ABP:  
a. For the overall stock of Bharat Net implementation status, resolution of issues and 
inter ag ency coordination, etc., Empowered Committee for ABP have been 
constituted.  
b. For the review and monitoring of Bharat Net Project execution / O&M / Utilization 
and related issues, resolving operational, contractual issues etc., Steering 
Committee for Amended Bharat Net Programme has been constituted. 
c. BSNL has been appointed as Project Management Agency (PMA) for this 
Program and shall select Project Implementing Agency (PIA), who shall 
implement this program on Design, Build, Operate & maintain (DBOM) model 
through competitive bidding and shall maintain network for Ten years. 
d. Vide DBN letter dated 10.01.2025, Ministries/Department, State/UTs, were 
requested to issue necessary directions to all concerned stakeholders; to grant 
RoW permission for expeditious ro llout and faster implementation of ABP in their 
state/UT. Govt. of Bihar and Andaman & Nicobar administration endorsed the 
DBN instructions of RoW to the concerned authorities under their control.  
e. To ensure periodic monitoring and expeditious implementati on of ABP, PMA is 
developing the Project Monitoring Tool which inter -alia includes milestone details 
& achievement, inventory management, etc. 
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
Increasing Bharat Net Utilization through Targeted FTTH Expansion and Rural Digital 
Services 
 The Committee have been informed that  as of January 2025, only 12.24 lakh 
Fiber-to-the-Home (FTTH) connections have been activated. Similarly, while 1,04,574 
Gram Panchayats (GPs) have installed Wi -Fi hotspots , actual rural broadband 
penetration remains low. The Committee note that  despite Bharat Net ’s infrastructure 
rollout, utilization remains a challenge.  In order to ensure optimum utilization of Bharat 
Net Utilization through Targeted FTTH Expansion and Rural Digital Services, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should launch an Incentivized Rural 
Digital Adoption Programme under Bharat Net Udyami, offering subsidies o r revenue-
sharing models for local entrepreneurs to set up and manage FTTH and Wi -Fi services. 
Additionally, a mandatory digital integration policy should be introduced, ensuring that 
all government institutions (schools, PHCs, post offices, etc.) actively  use Bharat Net for 
e-governance, telemedicine, and digital education, thereby increasing real -time data 
consumption and network usage. Further, as per the Amended Bharat Net Programme  
approved by the Union Cabinet on 04.08.2023, it is proposed to provide 1.5 crore rural 
home fibre connections distributed across all States/UTs with priority to cover 
Government institutions including schools, Primary Health Centers, Anganwadis, 
Panchayat offices etc., using the BNU model over the next five years.  In this co ntext,the 
Committee desire to be updated with the latest achievements related to the project. 
Reply of the Government 
i. Under the pilot project for provisioning of FTTH with subsidy support by DBN, 
BSNL has provisioned 5 lakh net FTTH connections to rural  households, govt. 
institutions, private organizations and others, using Bharat Net  network. All these 
connections have been provided through Bharat Net Udyami (BNU) model, by engaging 
rural entrepreneurs, in rural areas by utilising Bharat Net infrastructure. 
ii. Meanwhile the construction of Bharat Net  network in ring topology including 
upgradation of the existing network has also been initiated under Amended Bharat Net 
Programme by BSNL. So far, the Utilisation has been low owing to limited geographical 
coverage over Bharat Net network and also not -so-good uptime due to network being in 
linear topology. 
iii. With above robust and reliable network and through increased geographic 
coverage of network, it is expected to provide digital connectivity to more a nd more 
Institutions and households, enabling them to use the digital infrastructure and boost 
their economic condition, as individual and society as a whole. 
iv As per Amended Bharat Net Programme, 1.50 crore rural home fibre connections 
to be provide dis tributed across all States/UTs with priority to cover Government 
institutions including schools, Primary Health Centers, Anganwadis, Panchayat offices 
etc., using the BNU model over the next five years. BNU could be a village level 
entrepreneur, Internet S ervice Provider, Self Help Group (SHG), etc. Bharat Net  

48 
 
Udyamis (BNUs) will be used for providing and maintaining last -mile connectivity from 
village to household. BNUs will be given a one -time financial incentive for activating new 
home fibre connections.  To incentivize continuity of services, BNUs will also receive a 
share of the monthly revenue. Under the ABP, subsidy support per home fibre 
connections comprises capital incentive (including OFC, Customer Premises Equipment, 
all other accessories etc.) and Support towards provision of Internet Lease Line (ILL) has 
been funded by DBN. Further, BSNL will ensure that ILL subsidy should entirely be 
passed on to the end customers, so that an affordable and subsidized tariff/ plan will be 
available to the rural customers. BSNL shall submit a self -certification to this effect on 
quarterly basis. Accordingly, an Agreement has been signed between DBN and BSNL on 
09.04.2025 on utilization of Bharat Net  network for providing rural home fibre 
connections under Amended Bharat Net Programme. 
v. Further, in compliance to the Union Budget’2025 -26 announcement [Para 42] i.e. 
“Provide the FTTH connections in Schools and PHCs in rural areas through Bharat Net 
network”, BSNL has started to provide FTTH connections using Bharat Net, in 
coordination with State Govt. as per the details made available by Central ministry 
through DBN. These FTTH connections are being provided through Bharat Net Udyami 
partners under ABP. Similarly, efforts are being made to cover other Institutions i n 
coordination with related Ministry/Departments and the State Governments. 
vi. As on 15.04.2025, a total of 12,81,067 FTTH connections have been provisioned 
using Bharat Net. 
vii. Further, BSNL in support with DBN, will make full efforts to coordinate wit h Govt. 
Department for providing FTTH connections under ABP. The FTTH connections will be 
provided in rural areas as per demand and network feasibility of Bharat Net network. 
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
Enhancing Last-Mile Connectivity and Utilization in Rural Areas 
 The Department has set ambitious targets for Bharat Net and FTTH expansion; 
however, last-mile connectivity and effective utilizati on remain key challenges . As 
per the Department’s submission, only 12.24 lakh FTTH connections  have been 
provided under Bharat Net as of January 2025, while the target for March 2026 stands at 
18 lakh connections . Similarly, the installation of 1,04,574 Wi -Fi hotspots across 
Gram Panchayats (GPs)  suggests that while infrastructure exists, its actual usage 
remains suboptimal. The Committee note with concern  that despite the significant 
infrastructure rollout, Bharat Net’s potential remains underutilized. 
 To address this gap and ensure widespread adoption, the Committee recommend 
the Department to introduce a Last-Mile Connectivity Acceleration Program (LMCAP) 
under Bharat Net Udyami with targeted interventions. This could include a Localized 

49 
 
Entrepreneurship Model, where rural entrepreneurs are empowered through a Public-
Private Partnership (PPP) model , allowing trained local service providers to manage 
and expand FTTH and Wi -Fi networks under a revenue -sharing framework. Additionally, 
the Department could implement Subsidized Internet Plans, ensuring tiered broadband 
pricing to make internet access affordable for rural households while offering free 
connectivity to essential public institutions such as schools, PHCs, Anganwadis, and 
police stations. Furthermore, to drive sustained data consumption and maximize Bharat 
Net’s impact, the Committee recommend mandatory integration of all government 
services in Bharat Net -covered areas, ensuring that e -governance, telemedicine, and 
digital education are exclusively accessed via Bharat Net leading to the transition of  
Bharat Net to a catalyst for digital empowerment in rural India. 
Reply of the Government 
 
i. Under the pilot project for provisioning of FTTH with subsidy support by DBN, 
BSNL has provisioned 5 lakh net FT TH connections to rural households, govt. 
institutions, private organisations and others, using Bharat Net network. All these 
connections have been provided through Bharat Net  Udyami (BNU) model, by 
engaging rural entrepreneurs, in rural areas by utilising Bharat Net infrastructure. 
ii. Meanwhile the construction of Bharat Net  network in ring topology including 
upgradation of the existing network has also been initiated under Amended Bharat 
Net Programme in many States by BSNL and in more it will start shortly.  So far, 
the Utilisation has been low owing to limited geographical coverage over Bharat 
Net network and also not-so-good uptime due to network being in linear topology. 
iii. With above robust and reliable network and through increased geographic 
coverage of ne twork, it is expected to provide digital connectivity to more and 
more Institutions and households, enabling them to use the digital infrastructure 
and boost their economic condition, as individual and society as a whole. 
iv. As per Amended Bharat Net Programme, 1.50 crore rural home fibre connections 
to be provide distributed across all States/UTs with priority to cover Government 
institutions including schools, Primary Health Centers, Anganwadis, Panchayat 
offices etc., using the BNU model over the next five years. BNU could be a village 
level entrepreneur, Internet Service Provider, Self Help Group (SHG), etc. Bharat 
Net Udyamis (BNUs) will be used for providing and maintaining last -mile 
connectivity from village to household. BNUs will be given a one -time fi nancial 
incentive for activating new home fibre connections. To incentivize continuity of 
services, BNUs will also receive a share of the monthly revenue. Under the ABP, 
subsidy support per home fibre connections comprises capital incentive (including 
OFC, Customer Premises Equipment, all other accessories etc.) and Support 
towards provision of Internet Lease Line (ILL) has been funded by DBN. Further, 
BSNL will ensure that ILL subsidy should entirely be passed on to the end 
customers, so that an affordable  and subsidized tariff/ plan will be available to the 
rural customers. BSNL shall submit a self -certification to this effect on quarterly 
basis. Accordingly, an Agreement has been signed between DBN and BSNL on 
09.04.2025 on utilization of Bharat Net  network for providing rural home fibre 
connections under Amended Bharat Net Programme. 

50 
 
v. Further, in compliance to the Union Budget’2025 -26 announcement [Para 42] i.e. 
“Provide the FTTH connections in Schools and PHCs in rural areas through 
Bharat Net network”, BSNL has started to provide FTTH connections using Bharat 
Net, in coordination with State Govt. as per the details made available by Central 
ministry through DBN. These FTTH connections are being provided through 
Bharat Net Udyami partners under ABP. Similarly, efforts are being made to cover 
other Institutions in coordination with related Ministry/Departments and the State 
Governments. 
vi. As on 15.04.2025, a total of 12,81,067 FTTH connections have been provisioned 
using Bharat Net. 
vii. Further, BSNL in support wi th DBN, will make full efforts to coordinate with Govt. 
Department for providing FTTH connections under ABP. The FTTH connections 
will be provided in rural areas as per demand and network feasibility of Bharat Net 
network. 
 (Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan (CTDP) for the North-Eastern Region 
 The Co mmittee note that the Government has been implementing the 
Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan (CTDP) for the North -Eastern Region to 
enhance mobile connectivity in uncovered villages and along National Highways. Under 
this initiative, 2004 towers were initially planned for Assam, Manipur, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim, and Arunachal Pradesh. However, as of September 2024, 
1,358 towers have been installed, covering 1,246 villages and 283 National Highway 
locations, while 372 sites were dropped due to pre-existing mobile coverage, migration of 
population, and other issues. Additionally, the project in Meghalaya, which initially 
covered 1,164 villages and 11 National Highway sites, underwent revisions due to site 
deletions and additions, leading to a revised scope of 442 sites covering 637 villages and 
three National Highway locations. The rollout period, originally set for September 2022, 
has been extended multiple times and is now targeted for completion by March 2025. 
Further, the project for providi ng mobile services in Arunachal Pradesh and two districts 
of Assam is underway, covering 1,683 villages in Arunachal Pradesh and 691 villages in 
Assam, with an extended deadline of March 2025. 
 In light of the challenges in the North -Eastern Region, the Committee recommend 
the Department to expedite the resolution of forest and defense clearance issues by 
establishing a dedicated inter -Ministerial task force. Additionally, given the region's 
difficult terrain, satellite -based connectivity and innovative tec hnologies such as High -
Altitude Platform Stations (HAPS) may be explored to provide seamless coverage. The 

51 
 
Committee further recommend for closer collaboration with State Governments to ensure 
land availability and prevent further delays in tower installat ion. Additionally, the 
sustainability of these projects should be ensured by promoting community -based 
management of telecom infrastructure, integrating digital inclusion programmes, and 
enabling partnerships with local entrepreneurs to provide digital services. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Digital Bharat Nidhi supports schemes in areas where operators on their own 
commercial incentives do not find it viable due to difficulties in execution and low returns. 
The challenges are being overcome by proper planning,  coordination with all stake 
holders, constant discussions with DoT field units, State/UT Administration and Forest 
Department. To fast -track approval of RoW issue, the process has been made online. 
Further, regular review meetings are being carried out wi th concerned Central/State 
Agencies and other stake holders to resolve any issues. Additional steps like 
appointment of Third -Party Audit, setup of Project Monitoring Unit, Online Project 
Monitoring Information System, has been taken by the DBN.  
The progress of CTDP NER Schemes are as under: 
 
1. Mobile Services in Uncovered villages in Assam, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, 
Tripura, Sikkim, and Arunachal Pradesh (National Highways only) of NER and 
seamless coverage along National Highway (NESA): The extended roll  out period 
of the project was October, 2020. All 1,358 feasible sites have been installed 
covering 1246 villages and 283 National Highways sites in the project. The project 
construction phase is over and now project is in O&M phase. Remaining villages 
and National Highway sites could not be covered due to various reasons, such as 
villages already found covered, pending Forest/Defence clearance, villages not 
accessible, land record issues, villages washed out, villages not found, etc. It is 
mentioned that a ll remaining uncovered villages of NER are planned to provide 
4G mobile coverage under DBN funded mobile projects. 
2. Mobile Services in Meghalaya: - As on 30.04.2025, w.r.t. mobile services in 
uncovered villages of Meghalaya and seamless coverage across Nati onal 
Highways, 436 sites covering 626 villages & 3 NH locations have been 
commissioned out of 442 sites planned to cover 633 villages and 3 NH locations.  
3. Mobile Services in Arunachal Pradesh and Two District of Assam: - Under mobile 
services in uncovered villages of Arunachal Pradesh & 2 District of Assam 
Scheme, till April 2025, in Arunachal Pradesh 468 sites have been installed and 
commissioned covering 926 villages out of executable scope of 531 towers to 
cover 1042 villages. In two Districts of Assam, 222 sites have been installed and 
commissioned covering 303 villages. 
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
 
 

52 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan for Islands 
The Committee note that under the plan for Andaman & Nicobar Islands, 82 towers were 
to be set up for mobile services in 85 uncovered villages, along with 42 towers to bridge 
gaps in mobile connectivity along NH -4 (formerly NH -223). While the proje ct faced 
delays due to logistical issues, forest permissions, and land constraints, 66 sites have 
been commissioned so far. Additionally, the Submarine Optical Fibre Cable (OFC) 
project connecting Kochi to Lakshadweep was completed and dedicated to the nat ion on 
January 3, 2024, with a total estimated route length of 1,772 km and a financial 
implication of ₹1,072 crore. Further, the Department is supporting the augmentation of 
telecom infrastructure in Lakshadweep at a total cost of ₹62.86 crore, which includes 
upgrading 17 existing 2G towers to 4G, installing 20 new 4G towers, and creating a 225 
km OFC network for Fiber-to-the-Home (FTTH) services. 
The Committee observe that significant progress has been made under the 
telecom development initiatives in island territori es, including the Andaman & Nicobar 
and Lakshadweep Islands. Given the strategic significance of these islands, the 
Committee recommend that the Department ensure timely completion of the remaining 
towers in Andaman & Nicobar by resolving pending permissio ns and land issues on 
priority. In Lakshadweep, the telecom expansion must be accompanied by measures to 
enhance resilience against extreme weather conditions, ensuring that infrastructure 
remains functional during cyclones and other natural disasters. The  Committee further 
recommend integrating telecom expansion with the promotion of e -governance, digital 
healthcare, and remote education services in the islands to maximize the socio -
economic benefits of enhanced connectivity. Moreover, to reduce dependence  on 
mainland India for connectivity, localized satellite -based solutions should be explored to 
provide redundancy and enhance network reliability ensuring that the benefits of telecom 
expansion reach all uncovered regions, accelerating digital inclusion, e conomic 
development, and social empowerment. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Mobile Services in ANI: - After survey, the executable scope of this project is 88 4G 
towers. 41 of these towers are proposed to cover uncovered villages. 47 of these towers 
are planned along NH-4. 68 towers are commissioned.  
 
Infrastructure Project in Lakshadweep: - An agreement has been signed with BSNL 
on 01.10.2024. 19 new 4G sites are working. 17 existing sites have been upgraded to 4G 
services. Laying of OFC network is complete an d 7688 FTTH connections have been 
provided. 
Further, Amended Bharat Net Programme  has been approved by Cabinet in August 
2023 under Design, Built, Operate and Maintain (DBOM) model, for upgradation of 
existing network of Bharat Net Phase-I and Phase-II, creation of network in balance GPs 
by Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs), Operation and Maintenance for 10 years and 
utilization. It will cover all non -GP villages (~3.8 lakh) on demand basis. BSNL has been 

53 
 
nominated as the Project Management Agency and AP O issued by BSNL to PIA in 
package 9 for A&N and West Bengal.  
 
 (Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
Aspirational Districts Scheme : Strengthening Implementation and Expediting 
Project Completion 
According to the Department, the Aspirational Districts Scheme aims to provide 
4G-based mobile services to 7,816 uncovered villages across nine State s, with projects 
executed in two phases. The first phase covered 502 villages in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, 
Madhya Pradesh, and Rajasthan, with agreements signed in March 2021 at a cost of 
₹414 crore. However, as of the latest update, only 251 villages have bee n covered, with 
significant gaps in Rajasthan and Bihar. The second phase, covering 7,287 villages in 
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, and Odisha, was awarded in 
May 2022 at ₹3,765.47 crore, but the project has faced delays, with only 3,804 villages 
covered so far. Security concerns and untraceable villages have further hindered 
progress in 540 locations. 
Given the critical nature of mobile connectivity in rural and remote areas, the 
Committee recommend the Department of Telecommunicati ons (DoT) to ensure strict 
adherence to project timelines, with regular milestone -based progress reviews. Since 
Rajasthan and Bihar have the largest implementation gaps in the first phase, a targetted 
strategy be devised to accelerate mobile connectivity i n these States. Additionally, in 
security-sensitive areas, DoT may explore collaboration with local law enforcement 
agencies and State Governments to facilitate safe execution. To address issues of 
untraceable villages, an advanced geospatial mapping syste m be employed to verify 
locations before project initiation, ensuring that no planned sites remain unimplemented 
due to logistical challenges. The Committee also recommend that future projects 
incorporate a contingency buffer to account for unforeseen obst acles such as security 
threats, local resistance, and infrastructural gaps. 
Reply of the Government 
(a).  502 Aspirational District Project:   Till April 2025, 95% works of the Project have 
been completed. Out of planned 250 towers, 237 mobile towers have b een installed and 
providing mobile services to 274 villages.  
 
(b). 7287 Aspirational District Project:  Under the 7287 uncovered villages of 
Aspirational District Project (Phase -I), as on April, 2025, 5,430 villages planned for 4G 

54 
 
coverage by installation of 3,717 Towers and out of which 4,297 villages have been 
covered with 4G mobile services by installation & commissioning of 2,865 Towers. (77% 
done). Survey is pending at 388 villages due to security issues (229), Road Access 
&other issues (159) for which towers will be planned after survey.   The rollout period of 
the project has been extended upto 19.05.2025 for M/s RJIL and M/s BAL.  
          To sort the issues matters have been taken up with respective State Governments, 
Centre State Coordination Meeting chaired by Secretary Coordination, MHA, PRAGATI 
meeting, MoEFCC for faster resolution. Further, regular meetings were also held under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary/Administrator (DBN) with the USPs, MHA and state Nodal 
of Police Department to expedite the issues faced by USPs in executing the work.   
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
Strengthening Mobile Communication Services in LWE-Affected Areas 
The Left Wing Extremism (LWE) Mobile Communication Scheme was laun ched to 
enhance connectivity in some of the most remote and conflict-prone regions of India. The 
scheme has been implemented in two phases: 
  LWE Phase-I: Achievements and Gaps 
  LWE Phase -I, approved in 2014 at a cost of ₹4,214.28 crore, led to the 
successful installation and commissioning of 2,343 mobile towers  across 10 States . 
However, the project initially provided only 2G services , limiting its effectiveness in 
delivering essential digital services such as e -governance, telemedicine, and financial 
inclusion. As part of an upgradation plan, 297 towers have been upgraded to 4G as of 
December 2024. While Chhattisgarh has made significant progress (223 out of 525 
sites upgraded), other states like Telangana (0 upgrades), Bihar (only 3 upgrades out of 
250 s ites), and Uttar Pradesh (only 1 upgrade out of 78 sites) have seen minimal 
improvements. 
LWE Phase-II: Implementation Delays and Challenges 
LWE Phase -II, approved in 2021 with a budget of ₹2,211.11 crore, aims to 
establish 2,542 4G towers  in the LWE affec ted regions. The project was awarded to 
Reliance Jio (Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha) and Bharti 
Airtel (Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal). 
However, implementation has been delayed, with the complet ion deadline now extended 
from March 2023 to May 2025. 
Out of 1,289 towers in the revised scope, only 1,106 have been 
commissioned, reflecting a delay in 183 locations . States like Bihar, Jharkhand, 
Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, and West Bengal have significan tly lower tower 

55 
 
deployment rates. The Committee are concerned to note that Uttar Pradesh and West 
Bengal which have zero towers commissioned despite being included in the 
scheme. Additionally, 153 locations are pending for survey due to security 
concerns. 
The Committee recommend the Department of Telecommunications (DoT) to 
accelerate the upgradation of 2G sites to 4G under LWE Phase -I, particularly in states 
like Bihar, Telangana, and Uttar Pradesh, where progress has been abysmally slow. To 
achieve this, State-wise targets and strict deadlines should be set, with priority given to 
regions facing the most significant delays. Special interventions be made in areas where 
telecom operators encounter site expansion challenges. Additionally, for LWE Phase -II, 
where delays persist in States like Bihar, Jharkhand, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, and 
West Bengal, DoT may strengthen accountability by conducting monthly review meetings 
with service providers and forming State -level task forces to expedite approvals and 
resolve bottlenecks in project execution. 
 The Committee observe that security challenges have significantly hindered 
survey and implementation in 153 locations, delaying project timelines. The Committee 
recommend that DoT, in coordination with the Ministry of  Home Affairs (MHA), formulate 
a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for infrastructure deployment in LWE -affected 
areas. A joint action plan with State police and paramilitary forces be developed to 
secure project sites, particularly in high -risk zones lik e Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, and 
Odisha. In addition, DoT may explore alternative connectivity solutions, such as satellite -
based mobile communication, in regions where traditional tower installation is impractical 
due to security risks or geographical constraints. 
Beyond infrastructure deployment, ensuring affordability and service quality is 
essential for the success of the project. The Committee recommend that telecom 
providers be mandated to offer affordable prepaid plans in LWE districts to ensure 
accessibility for rural populations. Furthermore, a third -party audit mechanism be 
introduced to monitor network uptime, service quality, and coverage, preventing service 
disruptions. Future projects may invariably consider 5G readiness to enable seamless 
upgradation without requiring extensive infrastructure overhauls. By implementing above 
measures, the Committee hope that the Government can ensure improved mobile 
connectivity in LWE regions which could  contribute to economic growth, governance, 
and security enhancement. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 LWE Phase-I:- Under the LWE Phase -I upgradation Scheme, as on April, 2025, 
597 towers have been upgraded to 4G. State wise details are as under: 
 
S. No. State Sites providing services (2G) Sites upgraded to 4G 
1 Andhra Pradesh 62 59 
2 Bihar 250 5 

56 
 
  
 
 
 
LWE Phase-II: Under LWE Phase -II scheme, as on April 2025, 1373 locations planned 
for 4G coverage by installation of 1309 Towers and out of which 1186 locations have 
been covered with 4G mobile services by installation & commissioning of 1129 Towers. 
(86% done). 
Survey is pending at 116 locations due to security for which towers will be planned 
after survey. 
Tower locations where survey is pending due to Security issue, USP has been 
directed to conduct survey with the support from State Police Nodal Officer appointed by 
MHA. 
DoT already taken up the issues with Ministry of Home Affairs for security related 
issues and concerned state Govt. for overall issues in the scheme. Weekly review 
meeting is being held at the highest level in DoT with implementing agencies. 
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
Bridging the Digital Divide: Strengthening Tele -Density Through Targeted 
Financial and Policy Measures 
 The Committee note that, based on the dat a provided by the Department as of 
30.11.2024, India has a total of 1187.73 million telephone connections, comprising 
527.47 million rural and 660.26 million urban connections. The overall teledensity stands 
at 84.36, with a significantly higher urban tele density of 131.53 compared to rural 
teledensity at 58.23, highlighting the persistent digital divide. Furthermore, wireline 
teledensity remains low at 2.72, while wireless teledensity accounts for 81.65. In terms of 
market share, private service providers dominate the telecom sector, holding 91.28% of 
total telephone connections, whereas public sector undertakings (BSNL and MTNL) 
account for only 8.72%. Notably, Reliance Jio has the highest share of total connections 
at 40.21%, followed by Bharti Airtel at 33.17% and Vodafone Idea at 17.67%. 
 Given these insights, the Committee recommend that the Department intensify 
efforts to bridge the rural-urban teledensity gap by expanding affordable and high -quality 
telecom services in rural areas, particularly throug h Bharat Net and targetted subsidies 
3 Chhattisgarh 525 361 
4 Jharkhand 816 35 
5 Madhya Pradesh 22 5 
6 Maharashtra 65 6 
7 Odisha 256 109 
8 Telangana 173 6 
9 Uttar Pradesh 78 1 
10 West Bengal 96 10 
Total 2343 597 

57 
 
for rural connectivity. The Committee further emphasize the need to strengthen the 
wireline segment, especially for broadband expansion, by incentivizing fibre -based 
infrastructure deployment. Considering the declining market share of public sector 
telecom providers, the Committee urge the Department to formulate a strategic revival 
plan for BSNL and MTNL, focusing on service quality improvement, competitive pricing, 
and digital service integration. Additionally, given t he dominance of private players, 
ensuring fair competition and consumer protection be prioritized through regulatory 
oversight, while also promoting indigenous telecom manufacturing to enhance sectoral 
resilience.  The Committee are of the concerted opinio n that the Government can ensure 
inclusive and equitable telecom growth and foster digital empowerment across all 
regions. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Following programs/projects have been executed in BSNL to bridge the the rural -urban 
teledensity gap .The details are as under. 
v) Bharat Net phase-I Project 
vi) Bharat Net phase-II Project 
vii) (Amended Bharat Net Programme) Bharat Net-phse- Ill 
Project 
viii) Bharat Net Utilization. 
Bharat Net Phase-I 
BSNL executed Bharat Net Project on behalf of BBNL in 17 Circles covering   1, 04,173 
GPs for establishment of an optical fibre based network for providing broadband 
connectivity to Gram Panchayats for Universal services to rural population of the country 
as proposed by Govt. of India.  
The objective of the project is to extend the e xisting optical fibre network to Panchayats 
by utilizing the Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) and creating an institutional 
mechanism for management and operation of National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) for 
Non-discriminatory access to all the ser vice providers. This has facilitated high 
bandwidth connectivity in the villages. 
Status of the project as on 31.03. 2025 
Total Work front (GPs + Block HQ)           : 1,04,173 GPs 
Service Ready GPs     : 1,04,146 GPs (99.9%) 
OFC Laid                                                             : 2,54,798 KM 
 
Bharat Net Phase-II 
The objective of the project is to extend the existing optical fibre network to Panchayats 
by utilizing the Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) and creating an institutional 
mechanism for management and operation of National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) for 
Non-discriminatory access to all the service providers. This has facilitated high 
bandwidth connectivity in the villages. 
The work of Bharat Net Phase –II was assigned to BSNL for M.P, U.P and W.B Circle 
(now Sikkim Circle) in non–EPC mode for 24,453 GP, where BSNL is executing the 
Project by calling separate tenders for supply and execution. 
 

58 
 
Status of Bharat Net-II Project as on 31.03.2025 
Total Work front: 24,453 GPs 
Service Ready 24,290GPs (99 %) 
OFC LAID- 75,881 KM 
Amended Bharat Net Programme: - Bharat Net-Ill Project 
BSNL has been appointed as the single Project Management Agency (PMA) with overall 
responsibility inter -alia including bandwidth provisioning at block level,  selection of 
professional agencies through competitive bidding for construction, upgradation, O&M 
and utilization of Bharat Net network. The cabinet has extended the scope of Bharat Net 
to all 6.4 lakh inhabited GPs/villages including upgradation of existing network of Bharat 
Net phase-I and II to build the network in uncovered GPs and O&M for 10 years. 
Status of (Amended Bharat Net Programme) Bharat Net-Ill Project as on 31.03.2025 
6.  On behalf of Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF), Department of 
Telecommunication, Government of India, BSNL has floated Tenders (16 
Packages) for Design, Supply, Construction, Installation, Upgradation, Operation 
and Maintenance of middle mile network of Bharat Net  videTender Enguiry no. 
MM/BNO&M/BN-/T-791/2024 on 15-02-2024. 
7. The evaluation of bids in the subject tender has already been concluded and 
award of work is in process.  
8. The Agreements have been signed with the PIAs (Project Implementation 
Agency) with respect to the following six packages (out of 16 packages) of ABP 
Tender: 
(vii) Package-3 (UP East) signed on 20.02.2025 with M/s RVNL 
(viii) Package-6 (UP West) signed on 20.02.2025 with M/s RVNL 
(ix) Package-8 (Himachal Pradesh) signed on 25.02.2025 with M/s ITI Ltd 
(x) Package-9 (West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar) signed on 25.02.2025    
with M/s ITI Ltd 
(xi) Package-12 (Punjab) signed on 19.02.2025 with M/s HFCL Ltd 
(xii) Package-7  (Bihar) signed on 12.03.2025 with M/s Polycab India Ltd 
 
9. Signing of agreement for following three packages, is under process: 
(iv) Package-1 (M.P) with M/s  NCC 
(v) Package-5 (UKD) with M/s  NCC 
(vi) Package-13 (J&K) with M/s  STL 
 
10. The matter regarding award of work in remaining seven packages is under 
process of approval of competent authority. 
 
Bharat Net Utilization: 
 
- Under Bharat Net  project Phase -I & Phase -II, the optical fibre  network has been 
developed in rural areas.  
 

59 
 
- The infrastructure created under Bharat Net project is being utilized for provisioning of 
broadband/internet services through Wi -Fi Hotspots, Fibre to the Home (FTTH) 
connections, leased lines, dark fibre, backhaul to mobile towers, etc. 
 
BSNL is proactively reaching to existing leftover copper based    fixed    line    customers    
for    upgradation   to   FTTH   technology.   BSNL   is   also adding value to the FTTH 
product offerings to improve the retention  of existing customer base. BSNL is 
continuously improving its Urban and Rural tariff offerings for FTTH service. 
BSNL   has   extended   its   FTTH     reach   in   the country and has on boarded 41 
Lakh+ customers in last 5-6 years across 3,000+ towns an d 46,000+ panchayats   in the 
country. Further, BSNL is upgrading its fiber penetration in all states through local 
entrepreneur tie-up for last mile customer services. BSNL is continuously improving its  
value propositions in higher value premium FTTH plans to increase FTTH revenue. 
 
Phase IX.2 Project. For 4G mobile services 
Based on the directions received from DoT & in line with the ‘AtmaNirbhar Bharat’ 
initiative of the Government of India, BSNL invited Expression of Interest (EoI) on 1st 
January, 2021  thereby providing an opportunity to the Indigenous manufacturers to 
technically prove their product by participation in the PoC (proof of concept).  Upon 
successful completion of PoC, the bidder will become eligible to participate in the 4G 
tender of BSNL.  
BSNL issued 4G tender on 22.10.2022 for procurement of 1 lakh eNodeBs & associated 
core equipment’s on PAN India basis including Delhi & Mumbai LSA of MTNL on turnkey 
basis under Phase IX.2 Project. 
PO has been issued to M/s ITI (RQ) on 08.06.2023 for w est Zone RAN, M/s TCS for 
Core Hardware in all zones and RAN in NZ+SZ+EZ & M/s CDOT for software of 4G Core 
for all zones on 22.06.2023. 
Total 87,363 eNodeBs have been installed & 78,708 eNodeBs are on –aired upto 
31.03.2025. The I& C of 1 Lakh eNodeBs is expected to be completed by June – 2025. 
Further, BSNL has planned additional 22,000 sites to cater the supply requirement under 
Phase IX.2 project.  
The equipment being procured through BSNL 4G project is upgradable to 5G with 
software upgrade and minimal change of hardware. Total 38,825 sites to be upgraded to 
5G after roll out of 4G services.   
 
4G Saturation Project for mobile services in uncovered villages. 
 
Provision of 4G in Uncovered villages across India: Union Cabinet approval has been 
received on  27-07-2022 for provisioning of 4G mobile services by covering 24,680 
uncovered villages through 16,464 Mobile Tower sites in the country for 4G services.  
Provision is also there for additional 20% villages (4,936 villages/ 3,258 mobile towers) 
which are left out due to various reasons. 
Mobile coverage for inhabited uncovered villages is provided by the Telecom Service 
Providers (TSPs) based on their techno-commercial viability. 

60 
 
 To bridge the digital divide, Government, through funding from Digital Bharat Nidhi 
(DBN), is implementing various schemes for expansion of telecom connectivity 
through installation of mobile towers in the rural, remote and border areas of the 
country. 
 As of January '2025, out of 6,44,131 villages in the country (village data as per  
Registrar General of India), around 6,26,870 villages are covered with mobile 
connectivity. 
 Bharat Net  project is being implemented in a phased manner to provide 
connectivity to all the Gram Panchayats (GPs) for broadband services, such as 
Wi-Fi Hotspots,  Fibre to the Home (FTTH) connections etc. Further, the Union 
Cabinet has approved Amended Bharat Net Programme  for provisioning of 
connectivity to all GPs in the country in ring topology including upgrading existing 
network and connectivity to about 3.8 Lakh non-GP villages on demand basis. 
For providing high bandwidth capacity internet/broadband connectivity and mobile 
services to remote & rural villages and islands in the country that currently lack coverage, 
a number of steps & projects have been taken up with funding from Digital Bharat Nidhi 
(DBN). Some of the projects have already been completed and many are under 
implementation. Details of the major projects are as follows: 
iv. Bharat Net  project is being implemented in a phased manner to provide 
broadband connectivity to all the Gram Panchayats (GPs) and villages. The 
infrastructure created under Bharat Net project is a national asset, accessible on a 
non-discriminatory basis to the Service Providers, and the same can be utilized to 
provide broadband ser vices, such as Fibre to the Home (FTTH) connections, 
leased lines, dark fibre, backhaul to mobile towers, etc. On 04.08.2023, the Union 
Cabinet has approved the Amended Bharat Net Programme (ABP) under Design, 
Built, Operate and Maintain (DBOM) model, for up-gradation of existing network of 
Bharat Net  Phase-I and Phase -II, creation of network in balance 42,000 GPs 
(approx.), Operation and Maintenance for 10 years and utilization. The 
connectivity to remaining non -GP villages (about 3.8 lakhs) is proposed to  be 
provided on demand basis from their respective GPs. BSNL will have target of 
providing 1.50 crore FTTH connections to households in next five years. BSNL 
has been nominated as the Project Management Agency. As of Apr -2025; 
2,14,325 GPs have been made s ervice ready under Bharat Net  project in the 
country. 
v. For provision of high -speed internet/data and Mobile Services (including 4G) in 
remote & rural areas of the country, various targeted schemes/projects have been 
implemented. Comprehensive Telecom Develo pment Plan (CTDP) for mobile 
connectivity in the North Eastern Region, Comprehensive Telecom Development 
Plan for Islands (Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands), Scheme for 
providing mobile services in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas, Schemes  
for providing mobile services in Aspirational Districts, Scheme for providing mobile 
services in the border villages and other priority areas, 4G Saturation scheme to 
provide mobile coverage in all uncovered villages etc.. The project for saturation 
of 4G  mobile services for providing 4G mobile services in uncovered villages in 

61 
 
remote and difficult areas of the country is also under implementation. Till Apr -
2025, 20,688 mobile towers have been commissioned in the country under 
various projects. 
vi. Commissioning of submarine optical fibre cable on 10.08.2020 between Chennai 
and Andaman & Nicobar Islands (2312 Km) for providing high speed internet/data 
connectivity to Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Commissioning of Submarine OFC 
connectivity between Mainland (Kochi)  and Lakshadweep Islands (1869 km) 
(Total 11 Islands; Kavaratti, Kalpeni, Agatti, Amini, Androth, Minicoy, Bangaram, 
Bitra, Chetlat, Kiltan and Kadmath) on 03.01.2024. Creation of 225Km OFC 
network in Lakshadweep Islands for provision of FTTH & other servi ces. These 
optical fibre cable projects have facilitated faster roll out of mobile services 
(4G/5G) and other high-speed data/internet services in the Islands. 
 
  (Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
    O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
Enhancing Financial Utilization and Efficiency of PLI Scheme 
The Committee note that under PLI Scheme the Actual expenditure till December 
2024 is Rs 13.75 Cr out of RE Rs 1450.97 cr for FY 2024 -25 and BE for 2025 -26 is Rs 
1965.50 cr. The Department during the oral evidence before the Committee deposed that  
the forecast investment for this Scheme is Rs.4,014 crore. For the current year, out of 
Rs.1,451 crore of RE, Rs.953 crore is likely to be spent.The Committee note that since 
both MSMEs and non -MSMEs are beneficiaries of the Scheme, the Department should 
ensure equitable distribution of funds, with targetted interventions to support MSMEs in 
accessing incentives. If any systemic issues are preventing full utilization, a mid -year 
review mechanism be established to reallocate funds where they are needed most, 
preventing non-utilization precious fund. 
Additionally, the Department may focus on proactive engagement with industry 
stakeholders to ensure timely submission of claims and disbursement of incentives. 
Regular progress tracking and transparent reporting of fund utilization will help in 
identifying gaps early and taking corrective action, ensuring that the PLI scheme 
achieves its intended goal of strengthening domestic manufacturing. The Committee 
further recommend that the Department conduct a detailed assessment of the factors 
leading to under utilization and introduce measures to improve  fund absorption. This 
could include streamlining disbursal processes and addressing procedural bottlenecks 
that may be delaying claims and reimbursements. The Committee hope that the 
Department  will be able to utilize the funds allocated fully in the FY 2025-26. 

62 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
i.) Under the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for telecom and networking 
products, the status of BE, RE and utilization for the FY2024-2025 is as below: 
 
(In Rs. Crore) 
Scheme BE RE Utilization 
during FY 24-25 
PLI Scheme for Telecom and 
Networking Products 
1806.34 1450.97 843.95 
ii.) The investment forecast by companies during the 5 -year scheme period is Rs 4,014 
Cr against which, as on 28.02.2025, companies have made an investment of Rs 4,046 
Cr. 
iii.) The compa nies are required to submit their claims based on audited financial 
statements, which are typically filed in December of the following financial year. 
Consequently, disbursements are concentrated towards the end of the financial year. In 
the FY 2024-25, DoT has disbursed Rs. 843.95 Cr, around 58% of the RE. 
iv.) It is also submitted that the BE/ RE figures are based on the incentive against the 
sales forecast given by the companies at the time of initial approval. However, actual 
incentives vary depending on actual sales achieved by PLI company. Actual sales of the 
companies depend on various market forces and orders received by companies.  
v.) Regarding Steps taken to ensure timely submission of claims and disbursement of 
incentives: 
 
a. Regular meetings are h eld with PLI beneficiary companies to educate them 
and to resolve any queries related to submission of claims.  
b. The process for disbursement of incentive is done through an online system 
ensuring monitoring of claims by the Ministry/Department. The scheme,  
including the disbursement of incentives, is also subjected to regular oversight 
at higher levels within this Department, the Department for Promotion of 
Industry and Internal Trade and the Empowered Group of Secretaries. 
c. To avoid any delay in disbursemen t of incentive, the Department has framed 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for processing of claims made by 
companies 
d. To enhance utilisation of funds, Department modified scheme guidelines and 
introduced quarterly disbursement of incentives. Quarterly di sbursement of 
incentives will improve cash flow of companies and enable them to be more 
competitive.  
 
 (Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 

63 
 
 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
 Strengthening the Digital Intelligence Unit for Enhanced Cyber security 
The Committee note that the Digital Intelligence Unit (DIU) project, with an outlay 
of ₹22 crore over five years, has played a crucial role in tackling cybercrime linked to the 
misuse of telecom resources.  The Department has informed that the initiative h as led to 
disconnection of over 2.8 crore fraudulent mobile connections and the freezing of more 
than 13 lakh WhatsApp accounts.  The Committee find that while these achievements 
highlight the effectiveness of coordinated efforts, there is a need for further strengthening 
of the DIU through enhanced technological capabilities and greater integration with 
financial institutions and law enforcement agencies. The Committee recommend 
increasing investment in AI -driven threat detection systems and real -time data -sharing 
mechanisms to improve the speed and accuracy of identifying and preventing fraudulent 
activities. 
Given the growing sophistication of cyber fraud, the Committee recommend that 
the Department of Telecommunications (DoT) work closely with the Minist ry of Home 
Affairs (MHA) to establish a seamless, cross -sectoral response framework. A dedicated 
task force comprising telecom operators, cybersecurity experts, and digital payment 
regulators be formed to monitor emerging threats and proactively address vu lnerabilities. 
Additionally, citizen participation is crucial in combating cyber fraud. Through the 
Sanchar Saathi portal has gained significant traction, with over 10.5 crore hits, the 
Committee opine that awareness campaigns and digital literacy programm es be 
expanded to rural and semi-urban areas to ensure that all citizens are equipped to report 
cyber threats effectively. 
Furthermore, financial allocation for the DIU  be reviewed periodically to ensure 
that resources match the evolving nature of cybercr ime. A mid -term assessment of the 
project’s impact be conducted to identify gaps in enforcement and suggest course 
corrections. The Government may also consider establishing a real -time grievance 
redressal mechanism to support victims of cyber fraud, ensur ing that financial losses are 
minimized and perpetrators are swiftly brought to book and penalized. Strengthening 
DIU’s operational capacity will not only protect citizens but also reinforce India’s digital 
economy by ensuring a safer and more secure telecom ecosystem. 
Reply of the Government 
 
i. “The Committee note that the Digital Intelligence Unit (DIU) project, with an outlay 
of ₹22 crore over five years, has played a crucial role in tackling cybercrime linked 
to the misuse of telecom resources.” 
It is to bring to kind notice of Standing Committee that total outlay of DIU project is 
Rs 228.16 crore for 5 years.  
 

64 
 
ii. “The Committee find that while these achievements highlight the effectiveness of 
coordinated efforts, there is a need for further strengthening of  the DIU through 
enhanced technological capabilities and greater integration with financial 
institutions and law enforcement agencies.”……….  “Given the growing 
sophistication of cyber fraud, the Committee recommend that the Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT) work closely with the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
to establish a seamless, cross-sectoral response framework”. 
Collaboration with Stakeholders:  DoT through its AI&DIU Wing is using 
technology for collaborating with various stakeholders of the ecos ystem as 
follows.  
a. Digital Intelligence Portal (DIP) has been developed under DIU project for 
sharing of information related to misuse of telecom resources among the 
stakeholders for prevention of cyber -crime and financial frauds. About 560 
organizations h ave been onboarded on DIP that include central security 
agencies, State/UT Police, Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C), 
GSTN, Banks, TSPs, WhatsApp etc. DIP works on API based integration and 
on near real time bidirectional information exchange wi th financial institution 
and law enforcement agencies. 
b. DoT has been made part of various forums and review meeting being held by 
MHA for cyber frauds. DIP and system of I4C are integrated for bilateral 
information exchange.  
c. DIP is accessible to Central LEAs and State/ UT police for bilateral information 
exchange. DoT through its field units is engaging with State/ UT police for 
action against the Point of Sales (PoS).   
d. DoT is working in close coordination with RBI to consume the information 
being shared through DIP and integration for real time sharing by the regulated 
entities of the RBI. Further, DoT is also working with NPCI for building resilient 
information sharing mechanism.   
iii. “The Committee recommend increasing investment in AI -driven threat detecti on 
systems and real -time data -sharing mechanisms to improve the speed and 
accuracy of identifying and preventing fraudulent activities .”…. “ Furthermore, 
financial allocation for the DIU be reviewed periodically to ensure that resources 
match the evolving n ature of cybercrime.  A mid-term assessment of the project’s 
impact be conducted to identify gaps in enforcement and suggest course 
corrections.” 
Addendum DPR of DIU: A proposal has been undertaken for addendum to DIU 
project with total outlay of Rs 97.51 c rore for procurement of on -premises 
infrastructure for enhanced technical capabilities activities, Strengthening DIU 
units in field offices through hired expert manpower and support infrastructure, 
better reach to citizens for Sanchar Saathi services throu gh WhatsApp and 
awareness activities.  
DIU units in field offices of DoT:  DIU filed units have been created in 8 field 
units of DoT in phase-I and will be expanded to all field units in phase-II. 
The work handled by the DIU of DoT is of continuous nature a nd will require more 
funding going forward.   

65 
 
Regular Reviews: Regular reviews of the projects of DIU are being undertaken at 
different levels to enhance the capabilities through technological enhancement as 
well as financial needs. 
 
iv. “Additionally, citizen participation is crucial in combating cyber fraud. Through the 
Sanchar Saathi portal has gained significant traction, with over 10.5 crore hits, the 
Committee opine that awareness campaigns and digital literacy programmes be 
expanded to rural and semi-urban areas to ensure that all citizens are equipped to 
report cyber threats effectively.” 
Awareness for Sanchar Saathi: DoT through various means is working to create 
awareness about Sanchar Saathi initiative:  
a. SMS campaigns in English as well as regional languages.  
b. Awareness through various portal of Government of India and collaboration 
with financial institutions.  
c. Social media handles of DoT. 
 
Further inputs on awareness campaigns may also be taken from Media Wing.  
 
v. “The Government may also consider est ablishing a real-time grievance redressal 
mechanism to support victims of cyber fraud, ensuring that financial losses are 
minimized and perpetrators are swiftly brought to book and penalized. 
Strengthening DIU’s operational capacity will not only protect c itizens but also 
reinforce India’s digital economy by ensuring a safer and more secure telecom 
ecosystem”. 
 
Matters relating to Cyber Crime are under the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) as 
per allocation of the business rules. MHA has established the Indian  Cyber Crime 
Coordination Centre (I4C) as an attached office to provide a framework and eco -
system for Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) to deal with cyber-crimes. MHA has 
also launched the National Cyber Crime Reporting Portal - NCRP 
(https://cybercrime.gov.in) to enable public to report all type of cybercrimes. 
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
Addressing Debt Burden and Financial Efficiency 
 The Committee note that the total outstanding debt of BSNL as of December 2024 
stands at ₹17,301 crore, with a significant portion tied to Sovereign Guarantee Bonds 
and bank overdrafts. While the revival package provides some relief through deferred 
debt servicing and equity infusion, the long -term sustainability of BSNL requires a 
comprehensive debt management strategy. The heavy financial obligations not only 
impact operational flexibility but also limit the Company’s ability to make competitive 

66 
 
market decisions. It is crucial to restructure high -interest borrowings and explore 
avenues to refinance existing debt at lower interest rates to ease financ ial strain. 
Additionally, BSNL’s employee remuneration and benefits for 2025 -26 are projected at 
₹8,422 crore, further adding to financial pressure. 
 In light of these observations, the Committee recommend that the Department 
undertake a structured debt ma nagement plan for BSNL, focussing on restructuring of 
high-interest borrowings and refinancing existing debt at lower interest rates to reduce 
financial liabilities. A phased asset monetization strategy be implemented, prioritizing the 
leasing or strategic  sale of under utilized properties and non -core telecom infrastructure 
to generate immediate liquidity for debt reduction. The Government may also explore 
extending additional sovereign guarantees to enable BSNL to secure low -cost financing 
for critical infrastructure expansion without further burdening its balance sheet. 
 Furthermore, the Committee recommend that BSNL implement operational 
efficiency measures to optimize workforce deployment, enhance productivity, and 
promote digital automation in service operations. Cost-cutting initiatives such as process 
automation, AI -driven customer service platforms, and streamlining administrative 
functions  be prioritized to reduce overhead expenditures while improving service quality. 
By aligning debt restructuring  with strategic cost optimization, BSNL can enhance its 
financial stability, improve market competitiveness, and ensure that future investments 
contribute directly to profitability and long-term sustainability. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 BSNL has undertaken  a structured debt management plan & restructured high 
interest bank loan is as follows. 
 
 BSNL has raised sovereign guarantee bonds as tabulated below: 
 (Rs. In Crore) 
 
Sr. 
No. Issue Date Particular 
Amount of 
Bonds 
Outstanding 
Rate of 
Interest) 
(%) 
Remarks 
1 23.09.2020 BSNL SG 
Bonds Series-I  8,500  6.79 
Guarantee fee of 
1% (Rs. 85 crore) 
payable every year 
to DOT. Effective 
interest rate is 
7.79%. 
2 22.12.2022 
BSNL SG 
Bonds Series-
IIA 
 4,184.70  7.72 Guarantee fee 
waived off. 
3 20.03.2024 
BSNL SG 
Bonds Series-
IIIA 
475  7.55 Guarantee fee 
waived off. 

67 
 
4 20.03.2024 
BSNL SG 
Bonds Series-
IIIB 
1,308  7.51 Guarantee fee 
waived off. 
5 26.03.2024 
BSNL SG 
Bonds Series-
IIIC 
276  7.51 Guarantee fee 
waived off. 
 
With funds raised through sovereign guarantee bonds, BSNL has already restructured  
high interest bank loan(s) & as on date following amount of bank loan is outstanding:- 
 
Sr. 
No. Name of the Bank Amount in (Rs.) 
1 SBI 9,00,795 
2 Canara 10,50,71,141 
  Total 10,59,71,936 
 
 Further, BSNL is actively purs uing assets monetization through strategic sale of 
vacant lands as well as renting of vacant space.  In the year, 2024 -25 the monetization 
proceeds are approx. amounting to Rs. 1,120 crores which is utilized for debt service 
obligations.  
 BSNL implemented  operational efficiency measures to optimize work force & 
enhance productivity is as follows. 
 In order to increase operational efficiency in BSNL in Post VRS scenario, due to 
significant changes InTechnology, business model and business processes in the l ast 
few years and looking at the current market scenario, Organizational Restructuring was 
approved by BSNL Board and sanctioned strength post VRS in various streams and 
grades was conveyed to the field units in Nov-2021.  
 The exercise of restructuring th e organization was done where in number of 
initiatives were taken in the year from 2020 onwards as under: 
· Reorganization of Business areas: - Under Organizational Restructuring, to utilize 
manpower in effective manner, Business areas were consolidated fro m 198 to 158 by 
restructuring of business areas.  
· Non-Territorial Circles: - There were total 20 Non -Territorial circles pre VRS. These 20 
circles have been reorganized into 9 circles.  
· Reorganization of Structures: - The structures for all the Busines s areas (158 nos.), 
BSNL CO (01no.), Territorial circles (24 nos.), Metro Distt circles (2 nos.), Specialized 
circles (2 nos.) , Non-Territorial circles(9 nos.) in BSNL have been reorganized looking at 
current business requirement.  
· Manpower Planning: - Post VRS, new Positional and Operational norms were framed 
from organizational Restructuring. Based on which manpower has been aligned & 
optimized in BSNL. 

68 
 
Presently, in order to meet the current business requirement, there is a need for 
rationalization of workforce for which the exercise to Review the organizational 
restructuring in BSNL has already been initiated and is under process.  
BSNL has implemented Cost -cutting initiatives such as process automation. AI driven 
customer service platform in order to reduce the overhead expenditure. The details are 
as under. 
 BSNL is outsourcing its maximum customer service centres to partners for its operation 
to reduce BSNL workforce expenditures and also using automatic payments collection 
and AI driven chatboat is in process.” 
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 21) 
 ITI Limited -Strengthening Financial Liquidity and Operational Efficiency 
 The Committee note that ITI  Limited, a key public sector enterprise in telecom 
manufacturing, plays a crucial role in India’s telecom infrastructure development. 
However, the company continues to face significant financial and operational challenges, 
particularly due to its limited cash flow and shortage of working capital. These constraints 
hinder ITI’s ability to procure raw materials, manage logistics, and sustain operational 
demands. As per financial data, ITI has been operating at a net loss of ₹569 crore in 
2023-24, though a pr ojected net profit of ₹79.04 crore in 2025 -26 suggests a potential 
recovery. Additionally, ITI’s high material costs, which are expected to reach ₹2,836.05 
crore in 2025 -26, pose a significant burden on its financial sustainability. Furthermore, 
ITI’s reve nue streams remain highly dependent on Government contracts, leading to 
delays in payment receivables and unpredictable cash flows. The Company also faces 
increasing competition from private players and needs to strengthen its market 
positioning by leveraging its Government backing and expanding into high -value sectors 
such as defence, smart cities, and rural broadband. 
 In view of the above, the Committee recommend that ITI undertake a 
comprehensive financial restructuring plan to enhance working capital m anagement, 
optimize costs, and establish strategic partnerships. To improve liquidity, ITI may explore 
mechanisms such as invoice discounting and supply chain financing, particularly to 
address delays in payment receivables from Government clients. Additio nally, the 
Company may adopt a strategic sourcing model, engaging multiple vendors and 
negotiating bulk procurement agreements to mitigate material cost fluctuations and 
ensure timely supply. Investing in indigenous R&D and next-generation telecom solutions 
will also help ITI reduce dependency on foreign vendors and enhance its 
competitiveness in private telecom sector. Furthermore, to improve operational 
efficiency, ITI should implement digital automation in manufacturing and administration, 
leveraging AI-driven process optimization and lean manufacturing techniques to reduce 
operational expenditures while enhancing service delivery. 

69 
 
 The Committee also note that ITI’s capital expenditure (Capex) allocation has 
been declining, with only ₹105.50 crore proposed for 2025-26, compared to ₹400 crore in 
2022-23. Moreover, Capex utilization has been suboptimal, with cumulative utilization 
standing at only 70.66% as of FY 2024 -25. This reflects inefficiencies in capital 
investment planning and execution. To address this, the Committee recommend  ITI to 
adopt a structured Capex deployment strategy that prioritizes high -impact projects, 
particularly in telecom infrastructure and advanced manufacturing technologies. ITI 
should align its investments with emerging market opportunities such as 5G deployment, 
private networks, and Government -driven digital transformation initiatives. Additionally, 
ITI must expand its role in the Bharat Net project, leveraging its expertise in optical fiber 
and telecom equipment to become a key supplier for rural broadband expansion. The 
Committee feel that merger of BBNL into BSNL presents an opportunity for ITI to 
strengthen its participation in PPP projects and smart city initiatives, ensuring long -term 
revenue sustainability. 
 To further enhance its future growth prospects, the Committee recommend that 
ITI may diversify its activities into high -margin technology services such as cybersecurity 
solutions, enterprise networking, and IoT -based industrial applications thereby, reducing 
its dependency on traditional telecom manufacturing. Additionally, to overcome entry 
barriers in securing new tenders, ITI should actively co llaborate with technology partners 
and research institutions to develop proof -of-concept solutions, strengthening its 
credentials in high-value Government and defence contracts. Establishing joint ventures 
with global telecom players will also enable knowl edge transfer and improve ITI’s 
competitive positioning. By focussing on targeted Capex investments, optimum fund 
utilization, and strategically expanding into emerging telecom and digital service markets, 
ITI can transform into a financially independent  stable and technologically advanced 
telecom manufacturing entity. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 ITI Ltd. has informed that the company is in touch with various Govt. agencies and 
having synergy with C -DoT and BSNL. Company has received an order of Rs. 5100 
Cr for implementation and Operation & Maintenance of middle mile network of BSNL 
in states of Himachal Pradesh, West Bengal and A&N which will greatly enhance the 
Rural Broadband connectivity and internet accessibility to the citizens in these states. 
ITI Ltd . has supplied 4G RAN systems for BSNL 4G project for its West Zone 
network.  
 
 Currently implementation of 4G project is in progress by ITI Ltd. ITI Ltd. is 
executing Solar Street light project in the state of Bihar where in ITI Ltd. 
manufactured Solar Pa nels are being implemented for this project. Under Defence 
domain, ITI Ltd. is currently executing ASCON Ph -IV project where more than 
10,000Km of OFC has been implemented, Proof of Concept (PoC) of MPLS router 
and Microwave system have been completed. Fur ther, 4G upgradation project in 
Indian Air Force (IAF) is at the completion phase. ITI Ltd. has received Letter of 

70 
 
Award (LOA) from RDSO for Proof of Concept (PoC) and expecting similar order 
from Railtel. With this, ITI Ltd. hopes to be a major player for  indigenous 4G and get 
major orders from Railways & Others. 
 
 Further, as per Revival Plan approved by Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) for ITI Ltd. in 2014, total capex of Rs. 2,264 Cr. is approved for ITI Ltd. As of 
now Rs. 1,191.56 Cr. has b een sanctioned to ITI Ltd. as per their requirements 
based on the various Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) submitted by them. Further, to 
overcome the immediate cash flow issues, monetization of non -core land parcels 
located at Bengaluru is taken up which is under process.  
 
 Further, w. r. t. measures to expedite payment collections from Government and 
public sector clients to improve cash flow, ITI Ltd. has informed that a concerted 
mechanism is in place to expedite collections from all the customers of th e company 
including public sector units and Defence Customers for which the company is 
executing various projects. Regular follow up meetings are conducted with the 
customers with the primary focus on realizations and improving the cash flows for the 
company. 
 
 Also, ITI Ltd. is trying for Rate contract agreements for certain items there by 
reducing material cost fluctuations and timely supplies. In addition, as per the 
guidelines, ITI Ltd. tries to procure the materials through GeM portal by encouraging 
multiple vendors to enroll in GeM portal for getting price benefits. 
 
 Out of sanctioned CAPEX, ITI Ltd. has been investing in R&D for design and 
development of Defence products to meet out the Defence requirements and also 
have plans to invest CAPEX in Tran sfer of Technology (ToT) for Next Generation 
equipment, IoT, digital automation in manufacturing and administration, leveraging 
AI-driven process optimization and lean manufacturing techniques to meet out the 
upcoming requirements of the telecom market. Re cently, ITI Ltd. has developed 
Electronic Voting Machine (EVM) which is under production for meeting the initial 
requirement from West Bengal State Election Commission. 
 
 ITI Ltd. has informed that ITI Ltd. revenue has improved in the year 2024 -25 
where in Rs. 3,086 Cr has been achieved till 3rd Quarter as its turnover. 
 
 ITI Ltd. has informed that Telecom CAPEX projects are highly technical in nature, 
which requires specialized ,manpower for R&D activities and execution apart from 
significant Working capit al. CAPEX projects need to accommodate the above 
challenges in the proper execution of such technically oriented projects for long term 
benefits.  
 
 ITI Ltd. has entered in technology alliances with leading partners like C -DoT, TCS 
for 4G upgradable to 5G.  Also, ITI Ltd. has established manufacturing infrastructure 
for 4G /5G Radios across its three plants having capacity to manufacture 1,200 
RRUs per day. 

71 
 
 
 Further, ITI Ltd. has received an order of Rs. 5100 Cr for implementation and 
Operation & Maintenanc e of middle mile network of BSNL in states of Himachal 
Pradesh, West Bengal and A&N which will greatly enhance the Rural Broadband 
connectivity and internet accessibility to the citizens in these states. 
ITI Ltd. has informed that the company has entered i nto new technology domain like 
SD WAN, MPLS for enterprise networking, DMR, SOC, private 5G deployment in 
mines and encryption products for Defence. ITI state -of-the-art Research & 
Development (R&D) located in Bangalore plant is designing & developing 
Communication Equipment to support manufacturing and keep abreast of State of 
the Art Technologies in the field of Electronics & Communications. The R&D at ITI 
Ltd. has core strength in design & development of Encryption systems to secure 
Communication Network s and also in development of Network solutions & other 
diversified products like Electronic Voting Machine (EVM), Digital Mobile Radio 
(DMR), and Smart Energy Meter (SEM) etc. The necessary infrastructure to aid 
design & development is available in the for m of Test Instruments, Software design 
tools, CAD design tools, Reliability lab, EMI/EMC test lab and Telecom testing lab.  
 
Start-up India mission: 
 
 With a vision to contribute for Start -up India mission of Govt. of India, ITI Ltd. is in 
the process of e stablishing 1000 seater Start -up hub in phased manner at ITI Ltd. 
Bangalore plant for encouraging start-ups in the country. ITI vision for Start-up hub is 
to help Start -ups convert their Innovations to Pilot Products quickly through Rapid 
Proto-typing facilities under one roof and to Manufacture the Successful products in -
house and market them. 168 seater start -up hub along with Amenities like dedicated 
corporate hub meeting room, demo room, highly secure Wi -Fi connectivity is 
functional in ITI Ltd. Recentl y ITI Ltd. has signed Technology Transfer agreement 
with Start Ups in ITI Start Up hub for products like ONT, OLT, Router, Wi -Fi Access 
Point etc. 
 
Partnership with Private sector: 
 ITI Ltd. has entered in partnership with several private players for the f ollowing 
purpose: - 
Sr. 
No. 
Partnership with MoU signed 
date 
Technology 
area 
Status of Partnership 
1. Niral Network 
 
Lekha Wireless 
 
Insta ICT 
15.02.2024 
 
15.02.2024  
 
15.02.2024 
 
 
 
5G Private 
Network 
Solutions 
ITI Ltd. has entered 
into a partnership with 
Startups in 5G domain. 
Implemented 5G Test 
Lab in ITI R&D, 
Bangalore with the help 
of Partners. 

72 
 
 
Galore 
 
Altima 
 
Source Dot 
Com 
 
 
 
28.08.2024 
 
30.08.2024 
 
30.08.2024 
 
 
  
5G core and edge 
products can be 
integrated with 5G 
radio for compatibility 
testing.  
 
This will enhance 5G 
system integration 
activities in private 5G 
deployments and also 
showcase the Private 
5G lab to new 
customers. Similar use 
cases and test setups 
may also be deployed 
for Govt. Institutions as 
new business 
opportunities.  
 
The 5G lab setup 
would be utilized for 
the demonstration of 
use cases like IOT, 
Drones, Video 
Analytics, AR/VR, 
Robotics configuration, 
and operations based 
on 5G technology.  
2. JandK 
Operations  
15.02.2024 
 
Indigenously 
developed 
mobile 
operating 
system, 
BharOS  
 
ITI Ltd. has signed 
MOU with JandK for 
developing secure 
Tablets, PCs and 
Laptops with 
Indigenous BharOS 
Operating system. 
  

73 
 
3. Lavelle 
Networks, 
Infinity Labs 
Empaneled 
on 
16.10.2024 
and MoU 
under 
process. 
 
SDWAN  
 
Empaneled for 
manufacturing of 
SDWAN pr oducts and 
solutions. 
  
They will be assisting 
ITI Ltd. in setting up the 
production lines 
design, Manufacture 
and test the SDWAN 
solutions for the 
customers. 
4. Germer 
Technologies 
Pvt Ltd  
 
Aegis Smart 
Logix India 
Private Limited  
 
09.09.2024 
 
 
 
 
14.09.2024 
 
Battery 
Regeneration 
Solution 
 
Empaneled for Digital 
Regeneration of Valve 
Regulated Lead Acid 
(VRLA) and Nickel -
Cadmium Batteries.  
5. Techonomy 
Solutions  
 
12.08.2024 
 
ONT, OLT, 
Router 
 
ToT was signed with 
M/s Techonomy for 
manufacturing of ONT, 
OLT, Routers. 
            
          With consistent & focused approach and support of the Department, ITI Ltd. is 
expecting to turn around its performance and achieve highest turnover in this FY 
2024-25.  
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 22) 
Strategic Support for TCIL’s Growth and Competitiveness 
 The Department has informed the Committee that  TCIL has demonstrated 
consistent revenue growth, with its tur nover increasing from ₹1,595.70 crore in 2021 -22 

74 
 
to ₹2,603.46 crore in 2023 -24.  The Committee have been further apprised of the fact 
that the Company has set targets of ₹3,070 crore for FY 2024 -25 and ₹3,385 crore for 
FY 2025-26.  However, according to th e Department, TCIL faces significant challenges, 
including limited working capital, intense competition from private players and other 
PSUs, stringent regulatory compliance requirements, and the rapid evolution of telecom 
technologies. Sustaining this temp o of growth and maintaining a competitive edge to 
secure high -margin projects will require enhanced financial backing, streamlined 
procurement mechanisms, and strategic policy support. 
 Noting above submissions of the Department, the Committee recommend th at the 
Department to take proactive measures to strengthen TCIL’s financial and operational 
standing. To ensure steady revenue inflows and long -term stability, at least 25% of 
Central Government’s IT and Telecom projects may be considered for giving to TCI L on 
a nomination basis. Additionally, TCIL be entrusted with preparing tenders and Request 
for Proposals (RFPs) for Government projects, leveraging its expertise to ensure efficient 
execution and project management. Given its proven track record in intern ational 
telecom projects, TCIL may also be prioritized for implementing Government -funded IT 
and telecom initiatives abroad, including projects in Indian embassies and diplomatic 
missions. 
 To enhance liquidity and support expansion, the Committee further recommend 
that the Government may provide TCIL with additional funds by way of working capital 
funding. These measures will enable TCIL to pursue high -value projects, strengthen its 
financial position, and drive long -term growth in the telecom sector and t hereby ensure 
that TCIL continues to play a pivotal role in advancing India’s Telecom Infrastructure and 
global presence. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Department of Telecommunications (DoT), as the Administrative Department 
of Telecommunications Consultants India Limited (TCIL) gives a lot of importance to the 
revival, survival, shining and excelling in improving financial performance  and overall 
sustainability to all CPSEs under its control including Telecommunications Consultants 
India Limited (TCIL). 
 TCIL has shown robust revenue growth, with turnover rising from₹1,756 crore in  
FY 2019 -20 to ₹2,971 crore (provisional) in FY 2024 -25. The company has set 
ambitious revenue targets of  ₹3,385 crore for FY 2025 -26, indicating a continued 
upward trajectory. 
Further, the Profit After Tax has also increased significantly from Rs. 44 Crore in 2019-20 
to Rs. 144 Crore (unaudited) in 2024 -25, showing a robust growth of over 327% during 
this period. 
 TCIL executes several projects of DoT and its PSUs along with the other Ministries 
/ Departments of Govt of India within the ambit of extant rules, regulations and 
guidelines. DoT supports its PSUs including TCIL to undertake several study works.  
TCIL is furling the flag of India in foreign countries mainly in Middle East and Africa 
through the deployment of several indigenously manufactured products. It is also 
envisaged that TCIL may deploy the indigenous 4G equipment being  designed and 

75 
 
manufactured by C-DoT and ITI respectively. 
 DoT constantly endeavours in extending a supporting hand to its PSUs including 
TCIL in terms of working capital also.  To sustain momentum and financial viability, 
TCIL has been allowed to keep a major part of its profits by giving exemptions in 
depositing the part of dividends to GoI. 
In future also, DoT endeavours to support its PSUs including TCIL to get works from 
DoT and other Departments/Ministries. 
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
Bridging the Digital Divide: Strengthening Tele -Density Through Targeted 
Financial and Policy Measures 
 The Committee note that, based on the data provided by the Department as of 
30.11.2024, India has a total of 1187.73 million telephone connections, compris ing 
527.47 million rural and 660.26 million urban connections. The overall teledensity stands 
at 84.36, with a significantly higher urban teledensity of 131.53 compared to rural 
teledensity at 58.23, highlighting the persistent digital divide. Furthermore,  wireline 
teledensity remains low at 2.72, while wireless teledensity accounts for 81.65. In terms of 
market share, private service providers dominate the telecom sector, holding 91.28% of 
total telephone connections, whereas public sector undertakings (BS NL and MTNL) 
account for only 8.72%. Notably, Reliance Jio has the highest share of total connections 
at 40.21%, followed by Bharti Airtel at 33.17% and Vodafone Idea at 17.67%. 
 Given these insights, the Committee recommend that the Department intensify 
efforts to bridge the rural-urban teledensity gap by expanding affordable and high -quality 
telecom services in rural areas, particularly through Bharat Net and targetted subsidies 
for rural connectivity. The Committee further emphasize the need to strengthe n the 
wireline segment, especially for broadband expansion, by incentivizing fibre -based 
infrastructure deployment. Considering the declining market share of public sector 
telecom providers, the Committee urge the Department to formulate a strategic reviva l 
plan for BSNL and MTNL, focusing on service quality improvement, competitive pricing, 
and digital service integration. Additionally, given the dominance of private players, 
ensuring fair competition and consumer protection be prioritized through regulato ry 
oversight, while also promoting indigenous telecom manufacturing to enhance sectoral 
resilience.  The Committee are of the concerted opinion that the Government can ensure 
inclusive and equitable telecom growth and foster digital empowerment across all 
regions. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Following programs/projects have been executed in BSNL to bridge the the rural -
urban teledensity gap .The details are as under. 

76 
 
ix) Bharat Net phase-I Project 
x) Bharat Net phase-II Project 
xi) (Amended Bharat Net Programme) Bharat Net-phse- Ill 
Project 
xii) Bharat Net Utilization. 
Bharat Net Phase-I 
 
 BSNL executed Bharat Net  Project on behalf of BBNL in 17 Circles covering   
1,04,173 GPs for establishment of an optical fibre based network for providing 
broadband connectivity to Gram Pan chayats for Universal services to rural population of 
the country as proposed by Govt. of India.  
 
 The objective of the project is to extend the existing optical fibre network to 
Panchayats by utilizing the Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) and cre ating an 
institutional mechanism for management and operation of National Optical Fibre Network 
(NOFN) for Non -discriminatory access to all the service providers. This has facilitated 
high bandwidth connectivity in the villages. 
 
Status of the project as on 31.03. 2025 
 
Total Work front (GPs + Block HQ)           : 1,04,173 GPs 
Service Ready GPs     : 1,04,146 GPs (99.9%) 
OFC Laid                                                             : 2,54,798 KM 
 
Bharat Net Phase-II 
 
 The objective of the project is  to extend the existing optical fibre network to 
Panchayats by utilizing the Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) and creating an 
institutional mechanism for management and operation of National Optical Fibre Network 
(NOFN) for Non -discriminatory acces s to all the service providers. This has facilitated 
high bandwidth connectivity in the villages. 
The work of Bharat Net Phase –II was assigned to BSNL for M.P, U.P and W.B Circle 
(now Sikkim Circle) in non–EPC mode for 24,453 GP, where BSNL is executing the 
Project by calling separate tenders for supply and execution. 
 
Status of Bharat Net-II Project as on 31.03.2025 
Total Work front: 24,453 GPs 
Service Ready 24,290GPs (99 %) 
OFC LAID- 75,881 KM 
Amended Bharat Net Programme: - Bharat Net-Ill Project 
 BSNL has been appointed as the single Project Management Agency (PMA) with 
overall responsibility inter -alia including bandwidth provisioning at block level, selection 
of professional agencies through competitive bidding for construction, upgradation, O&M 
and utilization of Bharat Net network. The cabinet has extended the scope of Bharat Net 
to all 6.4 lakh inhabited GPs/villages including upgradation of existing network of Bharat 
Net phase-I and II to build the network in uncovered GPs and O&M for 10 years. 

77 
 
 
Status of (Amended Bharat Net Programme) Bharat Net-Ill Project as on 31.03.2025 
 
11.  On behalf of Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF), Department of 
Telecommunication, Government of India, BSNL has floated Tenders (16 
Packages) for Design, Supply, Constru ction, Installation, Upgradation, Operation 
and Maintenance of middle mile network of Bharat Net  videTender Enguiry no. 
MM/BNO&M/BN-/T-791/2024 on 15-02-2024. 
12. The evaluation of bids in the subject tender has already been concluded and 
award of work is in process.  
13. The Agreements have been signed with the PIAs (Project Implementation 
Agency) with respect to the following six packages (out of 16 packages) of ABP 
Tender: 
(xiii) Package-3 (UP East) signed on 20.02.2025 with M/s RVNL 
(xiv) Package-6 (UP West) signed on 20.02.2025 with M/s RVNL 
(xv) Package-8 (Himachal Pradesh) signed on 25.02.2025 with M/s ITI Ltd 
(xvi) Package-9 (West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar) signed on 25.02.2025    
with M/s ITI Ltd 
(xvii) Package-12 (Punjab) signed on 19.02.2025 with M/s HFCL Ltd 
(xviii) Package-7  (Bihar) signed on 12.03.2025 with M/s Polycab India Ltd 
 
14. Signing of agreement for following three packages, is under process: 
(vii) Package-1 (M.P) with M/s  NCC 
(viii) Package-5 (UKD) with M/s  NCC 
(ix) Package-13 (J&K) with M/s  STL 
 
15. The matter regarding award of work in remaining se ven packages is under 
process of approval of competent authority. 
 
Bharat Net Utilization: 
 
- Under Bharat Net  project Phase -I & Phase -II, the optical fibre network has been 
developed in rural areas.  
 
- The infrastructure created under Bharat Net project is b eing utilized for provisioning of 
broadband/internet services through Wi -Fi Hotspots, Fibre to the Home (FTTH) 
connections, leased lines, dark fibre, backhaul to mobile towers, etc. 
 
BSNL is proactively reaching to existing leftover copper based    fixed    line    customers    
for    upgradation   to   FTTH   technology.   BSNL   is   also adding value to the FTTH 
product offerings to improve the retention of existing customer base. BSNL is 
continuously improving its Urban and Rural tariff offerings for FTTH service. 
BSNL   has   extended   its   FTTH     reach   in   the country and has on boarded 41 
Lakh+ customers in last 5-6 years across 3,000+ towns and 46,000+ panchayats   in the 

78 
 
country. Further, BSNL is upgrading its fiber penetration in all states through local 
entrepreneur tie-up for last mile customer services. BSNL is continuously improving its  
value propositions in higher value premium FTTH plans to increase FTTH revenue. 
 
Phase IX.2 Project. For 4G mobile services 
 
 Based on the directions received from DoT & in line with the ‘AtmaNirbhar Bharat’ 
initiative of the Government of India, BSNL invited Expression of Interest (EoI) on 1st 
January, 2021 thereby providing an opportunity to the Indigenous manufacturers to 
technically prove their product  by participation in the PoC (proof of concept).  Upon 
successful completion of PoC, the bidder will become eligible to participate in the 4G 
tender of BSNL.  
BSNL issued 4G tender on 22.10.2022 for procurement of 1 lakh eNodeBs & associated 
core equipment’s on PAN India basis including Delhi & Mumbai LSA of MTNL on turnkey 
basis under Phase IX.2 Project. 
PO has been issued to M/s ITI (RQ) on 08.06.2023 for west Zone RAN, M/s TCS for 
Core Hardware in all zones and RAN in NZ+SZ+EZ & M/s CDOT for software of 4G Core 
for all zones on 22.06.2023. 
Total 87,363 eNodeBs have been installed & 78,708 eNodeBs are on –aired upto 
31.03.2025. The I& C of 1 Lakh eNodeBs is expected to be completed by June – 2025. 
Further, BSNL has planned additional 22,000 sites to cater the supply requirement under 
Phase IX.2 project.  
The equipment being procured through BSNL 4G project is upgradable to 5G with 
software upgrade and minimal change of hardware. Total 38,825 sites to be upgraded to 
5G after roll out of 4G services.   
 
4G Saturation Project for mobile services in uncovered villages. 
 
 Provision of 4G in Uncovered villages across India: Union Cabinet approval has 
been received on 27 -07-2022 for provisioning of 4G mobile services by covering 24,680 
uncovered villages through 16 ,464 Mobile Tower sites in the country for 4G services.  
Provision is also there for additional 20% villages (4,936 villages/ 3,258 mobile towers) 
which are left out due to various reasons. 
 Mobile coverage for inhabited uncovered villages is provided by t he Telecom 
Service Providers (TSPs) based on their techno-commercial viability. 
 To bridge the digital divide, Government, through funding from Digital Bharat Nidhi 
(DBN), is implementing various schemes for expansion of telecom connectivity 
through installation of mobile towers in the rural, remote and border areas of the 
country. 
 As of January '2025, out of 6,44,131 villages in the country (village data as per 
Registrar General of India), around 6,26,870 villages are covered with mobile 
connectivity. 
 Bharat Net  project is being implemented in a phased manner to provide 
connectivity to all the Gram Panchayats (GPs) for broadband services, such as 

79 
 
Wi-Fi Hotspots, Fibre to the Home (FTTH) connections etc. Further, the Union 
Cabinet has approved Amended Bharat Net Programme  for provisioning of 
connectivity to all GPs in the country in ring topology including upgrading existing 
network and connectivity to about 3.8 Lakh non-GP villages on demand basis. 
 For providing high bandwidth capacity internet/broadband con nectivity and mobile 
services to remote & rural villages and islands in the country that currently lack coverage, 
a number of steps & projects have been taken up with funding from Digital Bharat Nidhi 
(DBN). Some of the projects have already been completed  and many are under 
implementation. Details of the major projects are as follows: 
 
vii. Bharat Net  project is being implemented in a phased manner to provide 
broadband connectivity to all the Gram Panchayats (GPs) and villages. The 
infrastructure created under Bharat Net project is a national asset, accessible on a 
non-discriminatory basis to the Service Providers, and the same can be utilized to 
provide broadband services, such as Fibre to the Home (FTTH) connections, 
leased lines, dark fibre, backhaul to mobil e towers, etc. On 04.08.2023, the Union 
Cabinet has approved the Amended Bharat Net Programme (ABP) under Design, 
Built, Operate and Maintain (DBOM) model, for up-gradation of existing network of 
Bharat Net  Phase-I and Phase -II, creation of network in bala nce 42,000 GPs 
(approx.), Operation and Maintenance for 10 years and utilization. The 
connectivity to remaining non -GP villages (about 3.8 lakhs) is proposed to be 
provided on demand basis from their respective GPs. BSNL will have target of 
providing 1.50 crore FTTH connections to households in next five years. BSNL 
has been nominated as the Project Management Agency. As of Apr -2025; 
2,14,325 GPs have been made service ready under Bharat Net  project in the 
country. 
viii. For provision of high -speed internet/data and Mobile Services (including 4G) in 
remote & rural areas of the country, various targeted schemes/projects have been 
implemented. Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan (CTDP) for mobile 
connectivity in the North Eastern Region, Comprehensive Telecom Dev elopment 
Plan for Islands (Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands), Scheme for 
providing mobile services in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas, Schemes 
for providing mobile services in Aspirational Districts, Scheme for providing mobile 
services in the border villages and other priority areas, 4G Saturation scheme to 
provide mobile coverage in all uncovered villages etc.. The project for saturation 
of 4G mobile services for providing 4G mobile services in uncovered villages in 
remote and difficult areas of the country is also under implementation. Till Apr -
2025, 20,688 mobile towers have been commissioned in the country under 
various projects. 
ix. Commissioning of submarine optical fibre cable on 10.08.2020 between Chennai 
and Andaman & Nicobar Islands (2312 Km) for providing high speed internet/data 
connectivity to Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Commissioning of Submarine OFC 
connectivity between Mainland (Kochi) and Lakshadweep Islands (1869 km) 
(Total 11 Islands; Kavaratti, Kalpeni, Agatti, Amini, Androth , Minicoy, Bangaram, 
Bitra, Chetlat, Kiltan and Kadmath) on 03.01.2024. Creation of 225Km OFC 

80 
 
network in Lakshadweep Islands for provision of FTTH & other services. These 
optical fibre cable projects have facilitated faster roll out of mobile services 
(4G/5G) and other high-speed data/internet services in the Islands. 
 
 
(Ministry of Communication/Department of telecommunications  
O.M. No. 16-3/2025-B/8th Rpt. dated 11 /06/2025. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I) 

81 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

82 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 

83 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES   
OF THE  GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
   11 August, 2025  Chairperson, 
   20  Sravana, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

84 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND  
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY- FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 11 th August, 2025 from 1 530 hours to 1550              
hours in Committee Room No. ‘B, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY- Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
4. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
5. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
6. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai  Maadam 
7. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
8. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
9. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
10. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
11. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
12. Shri Devesh Shakya 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
13. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
14. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
15. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
16. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad  
17. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
18. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi   - Director 
3. Shri Amrish Kumar             - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee 
convened to consider and adopt  one draft Subject Report relating to Ministry of 

85 
 
Communications ( Department of Posts) and  four draft Action Taken Reports on Demands 
for Grants (202 5-26) relating to the Ministries/Department s under the  jurisdiction of the 
Committee. 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up the following five draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption:- 
 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighth 
Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2025 -26)” relating to the 
Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications). 
(ii) XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXX 
(iii) XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXX 
(iv) XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXX 
(v) XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXX 
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without modifications. 
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and present 
the same to the House during the current Session of Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
XXXX- Matter not related to this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

86 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTH REPORT  
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by  the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,15,16, 17,18,19,20,21 
and 22 
Total 22 
Percentage    100 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which  the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
         Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
        Rec. Sl. No.: NIL 
 
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
        Rec. Sl. Nos.: NIL  
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
 