i 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS  
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Tenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2025-26)'] 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
18 
 


ii 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS  
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Tenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2025-26)'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on           19.08.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on               19.08.2025 
 
 
                    LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                   NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
                 August 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 


iii 
 
CCIT No. 422 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 

iv 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................................................. (iii) 
INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................................................... (v) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………..................... 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………………………............... 8 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government……………………………….......................... 24 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration …………......... 25 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
are of interim in nature…......................................................................................... 26 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the 21st Sitting of the Committee held on 11.08.2025............................ 32 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Tenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha). 34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Communications and 

v 
 
Information Technology (2024-25)** 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
12. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
13. Shri Shafi Parambil 
14. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
15. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
16. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
17. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
18. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
19. Shri Devesh Shakya 
20. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Saket Gokhale* 
23. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
24. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
27. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Y.M. Kandpal  — Additional Secretary 
2.  Smt. A. Jyothirmayi  — Director 
3. Shri Amrish Kumar                 —        Deputy Secretary 
4.  Ms. Divya Rai                         —        Assistant Executive Officer  
 
**Committee constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024 vide Para No.833 of Bulletin Part-II dated 
26th September, 2024. 
* Shri Saket Gokhale  has been nominated vide Para No. 853 of Bulletin Part –II dated 03 rd 
October, 2024. 
INTRODUCTION 

vi 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology 
(2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee, present this Eighteenth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in their Tenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ relating to the 
Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts). 
2. The Tenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  on 21st March, 2025 and laid on the Table of  
Rajya Sabha on 20th March, 2025. The Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts)  
furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Tenth Report on 9th June, 2025. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 11th August, 
2025. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighteenth Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
 11 August, 2025  Chairperson, 
 20 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2024-25) deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Tenth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ relating to the Department 
of Posts (Ministry of Communications). 
 
2. The Tenth Report was presented to Lok  Sabha on 21st March, 2025 and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on  20th March, 2025. It contained 1 8 Observations/Recommendations. 
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/ Recommendations, as contained 
in this Report, have been received from the Department of Posts and are categorized as 
under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:– 1,2,4,5,6,8,11,12,14,15,16,17 and 18 
 
  Total-13 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total — NIL  
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and require reiteration 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total – NIL  
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are interim in nature  
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– 3,7,9,10,13 
 
  Total – 05 
Chapter-V 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee also desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and final 
action taken replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in                         

2 
 
Chapter-V of this Report may be furnished to them at the earliest. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the important Recommendations. 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT – REVENUE & CAPITAL 
SECTION 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
5. The Committee, in their Tenth Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Gross Revenue Expenditure at the RE Stage for the Financial year 2023-24 and FY 
2024-25 was Rs. 35416.54 crore and Rs. 38160.73 crore, respectively; while the Gross 
Capital Expenditure at the RE Stage for the Financial year 2023-24 and FY 2024-25 was 
Rs. 1580.7 crore and Rs. 1238.92 crore, respectively. The Committee note that while 
there has been an upward trend in Gross Revenue Expenditure from FY 2020 -21 to FY 
2025-26, the allocations towards Gross Capital Expenditure of Rs. 1580.7 crore at RE 
2023-24, Rs. 1238.92 crore RE 2024 -25, Rs. 1085.13 proposed at BE 2025 -26 and Rs. 
958.35 crore actually allocated at BE Stage during FY 2025-26 show a trend of constant 
downward revision. The Committee also comprehend that while the upward trend in 
Gross Revenue Expenditure has been driven due to a substantial increase in committed 
liabilities including salaries, pensions and allowances; the reduction in Gross Capital 
Expenditure indicates reduced allocations towards several key areas of the Department 
such as Mail Operations, Estates Management and the IT Induction & Modernization 2.0 
initiative. Further, regarding Gross Capital Expenditure during the year 2024 -25, against 
allocation of Rs. 1238.92 crore at RE stage, only Rs. 612.14 crore was utilized till January, 
2025 which is only 49.40% of the allocation. The Committee also observe that the 
utilization percentage of Gross Capital Expenditure is expected to go up from 49.40% in 
January, 2025 to an anticipated 96.85% by the end of the financial year, showing an  
abrupt rise in utilization during the last quarter of the financial year. 
 Observing that a large chunk of the Revenue Expenditure is of obligatory nature, 
the Committee feel that expenditure incurred under the Capital Section is absolutely 
essential as an investment for the Department to augment revenue generation and 
supplement efforts to bridge revenue deficit through business activities undertaken in the 
Document Sector, Parcel Sector, International Track Packets etc. However, impediments 
such as delays in administrative approvals lead to uneven expenditure throughout the 
year, thus resulting in under -achievement of physical and financial targets. The 
Committee, urge the Department to take necessary steps to involve all stakeholders while 
formulating execution plans for Schemes so that the tendency of abrupt utilization of funds 
at the fag-end of the Financial Year can be avoided and a steady flow of budget for capital 
investments is ensured. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard.” 
 

3 
 
6. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
“Department of Posts implements all its schemes as Central Sector 
Schemes through 23 Postal Circles across the country. In pursuit of 
effective implementation of schemes and service delivery, the Department 
conducts regular review meetings with implementing Divisions at the 
Directorate and maintains close coordination with Postal Circles. These 
engagements are aimed at providing necessary guidance and ensuring 
optimal utilization of resources. 
In FY 2024 -25, fund utilization under the Capital section stood at 
approximately 96.01% of the Revised Estimate allocation, reflecting the 
Department’s sustained efforts toward efficient financial management. 
Funds are allocated to the Circles after carefu l assessment of their 
requirements to mitigate the risk of underutilization. Furthermore, the 
utilization of these funds is monitored regularly, and necessary directions 
are issued from time to time to the field units to reinforce the effective 
implementation of the schemes. 
The Department remains committed to transparency, accountability, and 
continuous improvement in scheme execution.” 
 
 
7. In their Tenth Report, t he Committee had observed an abrupt rise in the 
utilization percentage of Gross Capital Expenditure during the last quarter of the 
financial year 2024 -25, from 49.40% in January, 2025 to an anticipated 96.85% by 
the end of the financial year and had urged the Department to take necessary steps 
to involve all stakeholders while formulating execution plans for Schemes so that 
the tendency of abrupt utilization of funds at the fag-end of the Financial Year could 
be avoided and a steady flow of budget for capital investments co uld be ensured. 
In its Action Taken Reply, the Department submitted that funds were allocated to 
the Circles after careful assessment of their requirements to mitigate the risk of 
underutilization and the utilization of these funds was monitored regularly along 
with necessary directions being issued from time to time to the field units to 
reinforce the effective implementation of the schemes. The Department also 
informed that in FY 2024 -25, fund utilization under the Capital section stood at 
approximately 96.01% of the Revised Estimate allocation. While noting the total 
percentage utilization of the RE stage allocation under the Capital Section during 
FY 2024-25, the Committee opine that the sudden increase in percentage utilization 
of funds from 49.40% in January, 2025 to 96.01% by the end of the last quarter , 
clearly points towards lacunae within the planning, implementation and fund 
utilization of Schemes of the Department , unless otherwise attributed to 
administrative delays. The Committee would, therefore, reiterate the Department to 
work towards formulating strategies for Scheme implementation after due 
consultations with stakeholders so that allocated funds are spent realistically 

4 
 
rather than rush of expenditure towards the fag end of the Financial Year. 
 
IT INDUCTION AND MODERNIZATION 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
8. The Committee, in their Tenth Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the Department did not receive any specific 
budgetary allocation towards R&D and innovation in AI based technologies. 
Further, taking note of the efforts of the Department regarding 
implementation of IT Project to provide end -to-end tracking in delivery of  
postal services, the Committee recommend the Department to ensure that 
all stakeholders are consulted while formulating plans to implement the 
Scheme on IT Induction and Modernization and that the physical targets set 
for activities, especially the Network and Network-NE, are achieved timely.” 
 
9. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
“Though, no specific budgetary allocation towards R&D and innovation in 
AI based technologies has been made under IT 2.0, Chatbot in Postal and 
Logistic Solution currently being developed. It would be made more 
interactive as the usage Increases. 
 To take the IT initiatives further, in -principle approval has been 
provided by the Competent Authority for the construction of a DoP 
Integrated Technology Complex at Bangalore, which will have a software 
development centre, Network Operation Centre (NOC), Software Operation 
Centre (SOC), Research & Development (R&D) centre, Innovation Lab, 
Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning(AI/ML) centre, Training Centre and 
Data Centre, with the  required administrative infrastructure. The Centre is 
expected to cont inue the software developments, including Artificial 
Intelligence based technologies and latest developments in Cloud tech, 
Machine learning, etc. 
DoP is regularly consulting with various stakeholders to implement the 
Scheme on IT Induction and Modernization so that the physical targets set 
for activities, are achieved timely.” 
 
10. In their Original Report, the Committee had recommended the Department to 
ensure that all stakeholders are consulted while formulating plans to implement 
the Scheme on IT Induction and Modernization and that the physical targets set for 
activities, especially the Network and Network-NE, are achieved timely. In its Action 
Taken Reply, the Department has submitted that t hough no specific budgetary 
allocation has been made towards R&D and innovation in AI based technologies 
under IT 2.0, Chatbot in Postal and Logistic Solution is currently being developed 
and it would be made more interactive as the usage  increases. Further informing 
about developments under IT initiatives, the Department also submitted that the 
Scheme on IT Induction and Modernization is being implemented after regular 

5 
 
consultations with various stakeholders . Taking note of the work done by the 
Department under the Scheme on IT Induction and Modernization so far, the 
Committee reiterate that concerted efforts are required to ensure that physical 
targets envisaged under the Network and Network -NE heads are achieved timely 
so that benefits accrued under the Scheme can reach intended beneficiaries. The 
Committee desire to be apprised of the progress made in this direction.  The 
Committee may also be apprised of the progress o f work in the construction of a 
DoP Integrated Technology Complex in Bangalore along with the target date of its 
completion. 
DAK GHAR NIRYAT KENDRA 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
11. The Committee, in their Tenth Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Economic Survey 2024 -25 has stated that recognizing the relevance 
of e -commerce exports, the Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) 2023 laid down 
provisions for fostering cross -border digital trade and promoting e -
commerce and other emerging export channels. One such scheme for 
promoting e -commerce exports through Postal route is the ‘Dak Niryat 
Kendra’. The Department has apprised the Committee that the Sub-scheme 
on Mail Operations under its Scheme on Postal Operations has a provision 
for international relations  and global business under which activities 
regarding setting up of Dak Ghar Niryat Kendras; establishment / 
upgradation of International Business Centres; and Upgradation of Foreign 
Post Offices (FPOs) /Sub Foreign Post Offices (SFPOs) are included. The 
Committee note that the aims and objectives under the sub-Scheme on Mail 
Operations are all directed towards augmenting revenue from export 
through postal channels by strengthening and upgrading infrastructure of 
FPOs / SFPOs; establishing Dak Ghar Niryat K endras (DNKs) in every 
district of the Country; and enhancing booking volume of International 
Articles by increasing handling capacity and ensuring high standard of 
service quality at FPOs / SFPOs. 
The Department submitted that it has identified 1013 DNKs at district level 
across the Country. The Committee, however, note that for the third quarter 
of FY 2024 -25, even though the physical target for number of operational 
DNKs in FY 2024 -25 was 25, amon g them only 2 were made operational 
and against a target of ugrading 2 FPOs / SFPOs, none were upgraded in 
the said quarter. Further, the Committee note that Dak Ghar Niryat Kendras 
(DNKs) have been established in 750 districts across the Country, however, 
the Department has furnished no timeline for realizing the goal of 
establishing Dak Ghar Niryat Kendra in every district of the country. 
Acknowledging the potential for revenue generation and business 
proliferation through e -commerce exports undertaken by  Dak Ghar Niryat 
Kendras, the Committee recommend the Department to perform, in a time 
bound manner, a district -wise assessment of requirements expressed by 
exporters for setting up DNKs and accordingly, draw a timeline for 
prioritizing and setting up Dak Ghar Niryat Kendras in every district of the 

6 
 
country. The Committee would like to be informed about the actions taken 
and progress made in this regard. The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the status of pending proposals, if any, received by the 
Department from Postal Circles for setting up DNKs.” 
 
12. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
“The Department has established 1013 Dak Ghar Niryat Kendras  (DNKs) 
across 761 districts, selected based on export potential and Circle inputs. 
Proposals for the remaining districts will be considered upon receipt from 
the Circles. 
All 1013 DNKs are in operation from the Department of Posts (DOP) side. 
However, in some areas, booking activity is poor due to low customer 
demand. Marketing and awareness campaigns are being conducted to 
boost commercial export through the postal channel at all DNKs. The Postal 
Directorate is also organizing workshops for marketing executives and 
divisional heads for capacity building. Meetings with exporters are 
organized in Circles to raise awareness of Dak Ghar Niryat Kendra. 
Export bookings have increased from 3.66 lakh shipments (Export value - 
INR 78.70 crore) in 2023 -24 to 4.10 lakh (Export value - INR 102 crore) in 
2024-25, indicating growing trust in DNKs. Out of the INR 3.0 crore 
allocated for DNK/IBC upgradation in 2024 -25, INR 1.96 crore has been 
utilized in FY 2024-25. The proposal for setting up DNKs in districts where 
none currently exist will be examined based on the establishment of new 
DNKs or the relocation of existing DNKs, contingent on export potential.” 
 
13. In their Tenth Report, with respect to establishment of Dak Ghar Niryat 
Kendras (DNKs), the Committee had recommended  the Department to perform a 
district-wise assessment of requirements expressed by exporters for setting up 
DNKs in a time bound manner  and accordingly, draw a timeline for prioritizing  
setting up Dak Ghar Niryat Kendras in every district of the Country. The Committee 
had also desired to be apprised of the status of pending proposals, if any, received 
by the Department from Postal Circles for setting up DNKs.  In its Action Taken 
Reply, the has Department submitted that marketing and awareness campaigns 
were being conducted to boost commercial export through the postal channel at 
all DNKs. The Department further stated that the Postal Directorate was organizing 
workshops for marketing executives and divisional heads for capacity building and 
meetings with exporters were organized in Circles to raise awareness about Dak 
Ghar Niryat Kendras (DNKs). It was also informed that out of an allocation of Rs.3.0 
crore for upgradation of DNK/IBC in FY 2024-25, Rs.1.96 crore have been utilized in 
the financial year and proposals for setting up DNKs in districts , where none 
currently existed, would be examined based on the establishment of new DNKs or 
the relocation of existing DNKs, contingent on export potential.  While taking 
cognizance of  the efforts made by the Department in promoting e -commerce 

7 
 
exports through Postal route, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation 
and urge the Department to have a time-bound exercise for assessing in setting up 
DNKs in districts where none exist currently and where export potential can be 
optimally harnessed to promote e -commerce and cross border digital trade.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken and progress made in this 
regard. The Committee would also like to be enlightened about the number of 
Marketing and awareness campaigns conducted at the Dak Niryat Kendras to boost 
commercial export through Postal channels and Workshops organized by the 
Postal Directorates for Marketing Executives and Divisional Heads and its outcome 
during the Financial Years, 2023-24 and 2024-25. 
 
*****  

8 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS 
 
Budgetary Allocations proposed by the Department from the Financial year 2020 -21 up 
to FY 2025 -26 are Rs. 38181.15 crore, Rs. 39273.74 crore, Rs. 41614.74 crore, Rs. 
42373.29 crore, Rs. 42836.35 crore and Rs. 42522.50 crore, respectively. Against 
amounts proposed, the allocations made at the BE Stage from the Financial year 2020 -
21 to FY 2025-26 are Rs. 35188.43 crore, Rs. 35173.27 crore, Rs. 36395.89 crore, Rs. 
40553.38 crore, Rs. 38917.24 crore and Rs. 41086.97 crore, respectively. The Committee 
note that  the actual allocations at BE Stage have always been on the lower side as 
compared to the amount proposed by the Department from the Financial year 2020-21 to 
FY 2025-26. Further, the Committee note downward reduction of funds allocated to the 
Department at the RE Stage as against proposed allocations for each of the years from 
FY 2020 -21 to FY 2024 -25. During the year 2024 -25, the proposed allocation of the 
Department was to the tune of Rs. 42836.35 crore against which an allocation of only Rs. 
39399.65 cr ore was made at RE Stage. However, on being asked about financial 
constraints faced by the Department in discharging its responsibilities / functions due to 
such reductions during the year 2024 -25, the Department submitted that the budgetary 
provisions have been as per the requirement within approved Schemes/programmes. 
 
The Committee also note that while a large chunk of the budget allocated to the 
Department is spent on establishment expenditures comprising Pensionary Charges, 
Salaries and Allowances; the Department submitted that initiatives are being taken to 
optimize resources allocated towards implementation of Central Sector Schemes by 
creating a robust monitoring mechanism for expenditure on Schemes and their 
implementation. The Committee opine that with the rising expenditure towards committed 
liabilities, the Depa rtment needs to focus on maximizing revenue generation through 
proper implementation of its Schemes. While appreciating the efforts made by the 
Department towards optimal fund utilization and capacity building initiatives of available 
manpower, the Committee urge the Department to make concerted efforts to achieve the 
set physical and financial targets under Schemes so that realistic allocations can be 
proposed without having drastic cuts during actual allocations at the BE and RE Stages, 
respectively. 
 
Reply of the Government 
All the Schemes of Department of Posts are Central Sector Schemes which are executed 
through 23 Postal Circles. To achieve effective implementation, the Department holds 
regular review meetings with Scheme implementing Divisions in the Directorate and 
conducts meetings with Postal Circles to ensure optimum utilization of resources as well 
as effective implementation and achievement of physical targets set under the schemes. 
Fund utilization in FY 2024-25 has been around 96.26% of the RE allocation. 
The Department acknowledges the Committee's observation regarding the optimal 
utilization of funds through the effective implementation of its schemes. It remains 
committed to enhancing efficiency and ensuring the judicious deployment of resources to 
achieve targeted outcomes. The Department will continue to strengthen its monitoring 

9 
 
mechanisms, conduct regular review meetings to assess physical and financial progress, 
and promote effective coordination among implementing divisions and Postal Circles. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt dated 09.06.2025) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT – REVENUE & CAPITAL 
SECTION 
The Gross Revenue Expenditure at the RE Stage for the Financial year 2023-24 and FY 
2024-25 was Rs. 35416.54 crore and Rs. 38160.73 crore, respectively; while the Gross 
Capital Expenditure at the RE Stage for the Financial year 2023-24 and FY 2024-25 was 
Rs. 1580.7 crore and Rs. 1238.92 crore, respectively. The Committee note that while 
there has been an upward trend in Gross Revenue Expenditure from FY 2020 -21 to FY 
2025-26, the allocations towards Gross Capital Expenditure of Rs. 1580.7 crore at RE 
2023-24, Rs. 1238.92 crore RE 2024 -25, Rs. 1085.13 proposed at BE 2025 -26 and Rs. 
958.35 crore actually allocated at BE Stage during FY 2025-26 show a trend of constant 
downward revision. The Committee also comprehend that while the upward trend in 
Gross Revenue Expenditure has been driven due to a substantial increase in committed 
liabilities including salaries, pensions and allowances; the reduction in Gross Capital 
Expenditure indicates reduced allocations towards several key areas of the Department 
such as Mail Operations, Estates Management and the IT Induction & Modernization 2.0 
initiative. Further, regarding Gross Capital Expenditure during the year 2024 -25, against 
allocation of Rs. 1238.92 crore at RE stage, only Rs. 612.14 crore was utilized till January, 
2025 which is only 49.40% of the allocation. The Committee also observe that the 
utilization percentage of Gross Capital Expenditure is expected to go up from 49.40% in 
January, 2025 to an anticipated 96.85% by the end of the financial year, showing an 
abrupt rise in utilization during the last quarter of the financial year. 
 Observing that a large chunk of the Revenue Expenditure is of obligatory nature, 
the Committee feel that expenditure incurred under the Capital Section is absolutely 
essential as an investment for the Department to augment revenue generation and 
supplement efforts to bridge revenue deficit through business activities undertaken in the 
Document Sector, Parcel Sector, International Track Packets etc. However, impediments 
such as delays in administrative approvals lead to uneven expenditure throughout the 
year, thus resulting in under -achievement of physical and financial targets. The 
Committee, urge the Department to take necessary steps to involve all stakeholders while 
formulating execution plans for Schemes so that the tendency of abrupt utilization of funds 
at the fag-end of the Financial Year can be avoided and a steady flow of budget for capital 
investments is ensured. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Department of Posts implements all its schemes as Central Sector Schemes through 23 
Postal Circles across the country. In pursuit of effective implementation of schemes and 
service delivery, the Department conducts regular review meetings with implementing 
Divisions at the Directorate and maintains close coordination with Postal Circles. These 
engagements are aimed at providing necessary guidance and ensuring optimal utilization 
of resources. 
In FY 2024-25, fund utilization under the Capital section stood at approximately 96.01% 
of the Revised Estimate allocation, reflecting the Department’s sustained efforts toward 

10 
 
efficient financial management. Funds are allocated to the Circles after careful 
assessment of their requirements to mitigate the risk of underutilization. Furthermore, the 
utilization of these funds is monitored regularly, and necessary directions are issued from 
time to time to the field units to reinforce the effective implementation of the schemes. 
The Department remains committed to transparency, accountability, and continuous 
improvement in scheme execution. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt dated 09.06.2025) 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 7 of Chapter – I. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
SHARE OF THE DEPARTMENT IN THE TOTAL CENTRAL OUTLAY 
The share of the Department in the Total Central Outlay at the BE stage, in absolute 
terms, has risen from Rs. 35188.43 crore in financial year 2020-21 to Rs. 41086.97 crore 
in FY 2025-26. However, the percentage share of the Department for the same durati on 
has declined from 1.15% to 0.81%. The Committee note that the Department received 
allocation in the Central Outlay under two components namely - Central Sector Schemes 
/ Projects; and Establishment Expenditure of the Centre. Though there is a visible decline 
in the BE percentage share of the Department of Posts in the Total Central Outlay from 
1.15% in FY 2020-21 to 0.81% in FY 2025-26, a comparative analysis of the Total Central 
Outlay vis -à-vis BE stage allocation to the Department of Posts against the  afore 
mentioned two components, indicates a consistent allocation pattern with the Department 
receiving between 1% to 1.17% of the total budget. The Department has informed that 
this stability in allocation indicates that the Government continues to prior itize postal 
operations, ensuring that the financial needs of the Department are met without any major 
reductions. 
 Further, a similar trend was observed in the RE Stage allocation to the Department 
in the Total Central Outlay, wherein, the percentage share of the Department went from 
0.95% in FY 2020 -21 to 0.83% in FY 2024 -25. The Department submitted that against 
the two components of Central Sector Schemes and Establishment Expenditure of the 
Centre, the percentage share of the Department of Posts in the Total Central Outlay at 
the RE stage has remained stable, fluctuating marginally around 1.00% to 1.10% in FY 
2020-21 to FY 2024 -25. The Committee, while appreciating the performance of the 
Department for a steady and continuous growth, urge the Department to make all out 
efforts for increasing its revenue generation that would help bridge the gap between 
revenue and deficit. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department reviews its services a nd products keeping in view the changing market 
scenario, customer needs, industry benchmarks etc. and takes necessary steps/action to 
modify service features to  improve the postal services to increase the revenue receipts 
of the Department.  
Some of the measures being taken to reduce operational costs and improve the services 
to attract more customers subsequently leading to increase the revenue receipts in 2025-
26 are as follows: 
(i) Strengthening of marketing of Speed Post / Registered letter services to onboard new 
customers to improve the Speed Post /Registered letter revenue. 

11 
 
(ii) Revamping the transmission and delivery infrastructure by co-locating/ merger of mail 
processing hubs for reducing the operational cost by moving away from high-rent railway 
premises and improving the ef ficiency through co -location of various  mail processing 
units. Centralized hubs m ake it easier to plan efficient routes for the Mail Motor Service 
(MMS) resulting in enhanced route opti mization, reduction in transportation costs and 
better space utilization with flexibility for future expansion. 
(iii) Introducing new age booking avenues such as Booking Kiosks and online booking of 
postal articles to attract new customers. The Department is in process of installing 70 
more kiosks during this year. 
(iv) Introducing flexible delivery options such as doorstep pickups, scheduled  deliveries, 
Non-business Hour delivery, Holidays delivery etc. for better customer convenience. 
(v) Revamped franchisee scheme has b een introduced with the revised commission 
structure to increase the revenue of va rious postal products including Speed Post and 
Registered Post. 
(vi) T o provide enhanced after sale service , Single Points of Contact have been 
designated for corporate customers having monthly business of Rs.10 lakh and above in 
all the Postal Circles.  
(vii) Promotion of Philately by organizing various acti vities like Dhai Akhar, SPARSH, 
District and State level exhibition including participation in Foreign exhibition. 
(viii)The initiatives undertaken include the release of stamps on various themes, 
procurement of customized My Stamp business, and the provision of an online facility for 
opening of Philately Deposit Account. Steps are also being taken for activating dormant 
Philately Deposit Accounts. In addition, school philately clubs are being opened, and 
philatelic materials/products are being made available for online sale. 
The following specific action to augment the revenue of the Department has been taken: 
(i) An MoU has been signed with Khadi Village Industries Commission (KVIC) on 20th 
August 2024 for physical verification of units under PM Employment Generation Program, 
which has generated revenue of approximately Rs. 8.2 crore for the Department using 
the existing resources. 
(ii) Major mutual fund companies have been approached for their KYC verification through 
India Post. Two new MoUs have been signed with Nippon MF and SBI MF on 3rd April , 
2025 and 29th April, 2025 respectively. 
(iii) Through persistent efforts , transaction charges for POPSK services have been 
increased from Rs. 330 to Rs. 411 per transaction. 
 (xii)  Due to regular promotion campaigns and melas and increase in the cover under 
Postal Life Insurance make it available to all graduates, Postal Life Insurance/Rural Postal 
Life Insurance (PLI/RPLI) premium income is growing at a CAGR of about 14%. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt dated 09.06.2025) 
 
 
 

12 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
FUNDS SURRENDERED  
The Committee note that during Financial Year 2023 -24, out of savings of Rs. 3510.92 
crore and Rs. 193.81 crore under the Revenue and Capital heads, respectively, the 
Department surrendered Rs. 883.19 crore to the Ministry of Finance. However, no 
explanation was furnished by the Department about the reasons for surrendering such 
significant quantum of allocated funds. The Committee observe that while the percentage 
utilization of RE Stage allocation for FY 2023-24 under the Revenue head was 100.64%, 
the RE Stage funds allocated towards the Capital head were under -utilized with the 
percentage utilization being only 87.73%. The Committee further note that against a 
proposed allocation of Rs. 42373.29 crore during the year 2023 -24 the Department was 
allocated o nly Rs. 36997.24 crore at the RE Stage. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to aim at complete utilization of allocated funds under both 
the Revenue and Capital heads and to refrain from the tendency of surrendering funds 
so that adequate al locations are made to the Department in future and Scheme 
implementation does not suffer for want of funds. Further the Committee observe that 
such precious funds could have been gainfully utilized by any other Ministry/Department 
had realistic assessments been made by the Department of Posts. 
 
Reply of the Government 
During the financial year 2024–25, the Department prioritized optimal utilization of funds 
under both Revenue and Capital sections. Against the Revised Estimate (RE) allocation 
of Rs. 39,399.65 crore, a total of Rs. 39,355.38 crore was distributed among Circles/Units. 
An expenditure of Rs.38,715.42 crore was incurred during the year, representing 98.37% 
of the allocated fund.   This high level of fund utilization reflects the Department’s strong 
commitment to effective fund management and robust expenditure control. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt 09.06.2025) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
POSTAL OPERATIONS 
The Committee note that the proposed allocations towards the Scheme on Postal 
Operations saw a constant decline from Rs. 681.94 crore in FY 2020-21 to 240.32 crore 
in FY 2025-26. Further, the RE Stage allocations towards this Scheme have also shown 
an undulating trend for the same duration. According to the Department approximately 
69.94% of the total allocation for Postal Operations during FY 2024 -25 has been 
specifically set aside for the Mail Operations Sub -Scheme in order to streamline 
operations, reduc e delivery times and provide a better experience for users. The 
Committee were enlightened that steps are being taken to enhance operational efficiency 
in Postal Operations by carrying out mechanization of beats. The Committee, however, 
note that a significant variation of Rs. 51.74 crore is seen between the BE and RE Stage 
allocations in during FY 2024-25 towards the Mail Operations sub-scheme and out of RE 
Stage allocation of Rs. 106.31 crore, only Rs. 54.61 crore have been utilized up to 
December 2024. Taking note of the tardy progress in utilization of fund allocated towards 
the prioritized sub -Scheme of Mail Operations, the Committee recommend the 
Department to devise a mechanism to ensure efficient utilization of allocated funds and 
timely achievement of set physical targets. The Committee may be apprised of the 
progress made therein. 
 

13 
 
Reply of the Government 
To ensure efficient utilization of allocated funds and  timely achievement of set targets, 
Department has implemented a structured monitoring mechanism for review of physical 
and financial targets under Schemes. This includes regular submission of fund utilization 
reports by the Circles and reviews which results reduction in the expenditure and also for 
effective and timely utilization of budget. 
As stated earlier, a significant portion of the allocated funds is directed toward Mail 
Operations activities. D uring FY 2024 –25, an amount of Rs. 98.36 crore was allocated 
against the Revised Estimate (RE) of Rs. 106.31 crore under the Mail Network 
Optimization Program (MNOP). 
An expenditure of Rs. 97.47 crore was incurred, achieving a 99.10% utilization of the 
allocated funds. The Department continues to emphasize efficient resource utilization and 
operational effectiveness in core mail services. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt 09.06.2025) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
The Committee note that the Department did not receive any specific budgetary allocation 
towards R&D and innovation in AI based technologies. Further, taking note of the efforts 
of the Department regarding implementation of IT Project to provide end -to-end tracking 
in delivery of postal services, the Committee recommend the Department to ensure that 
all stakeholders are consulted while formulating plans to implement the Scheme on IT 
Induction and Modernization and that the physical targets set for activities, especially the 
Network and Network-NE, are achieved timely. 
Reply of the Government 
Though, no specific budgetary allocation towards R&D and innovation in AI based 
technologies has been made under IT 2.0, Chatbot in Postal and Logistic Solution 
currently being developed. It would be made more interactive as the usage Increases. 
 To take the IT initiatives further, in -principle approval has been provided by the 
Competent Authority for the construction of a  DoP Integrated Technology Complex at 
Bangalore, which will have a software development centre , Network Operation Centre 
(NOC), Software Operation Centre  (SOC), Research & Development  (R&D) centre , 
Innovation Lab, Artificial Intelligence /Machine Learning( AI/ML) centre, Training Centre 
and Data Centre, with the  required administrative infrastructure. The Centre is expected 
to continue the so ftware developments, including Artificial Intelligence based 
technologies and latest developments in Cloud tech, Machine learning, etc. 
DoP is regularly consulting with various stakeholders to implement the Scheme on 
IT Induction and Modernization so that the physical targets set for activities, are achieved 
timely. 
((Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt 09.06.2025) 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 10 of Chapter – I. 
 
 
 

14 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
The Committee note that no separate allocation has been made under the Scheme on 
Estates Management for GIS Survey and GIS Mapping on Postal estates. Further, during 
the oral deposition, the Committee were also apprised about dilapidated conditions of 
Postal buildings and issues faced by the Department for want of funds for maintenance 
and repair. The Committee perceive that maintenance of heritage Postal buildings is 
necessary not just to preserve the rich cultural legacy of the Postal Department but also 
to showcase the cultural relevance of India Post through activities such as Philatelic 
exhibitions, Heritage tours etc., which, in effect, could also emerge as a much -needed 
source of revenue generation for the Department. Emphasizing on the importance of the 
heritage value held by Postal assets, the Committee also believe that GIS Survey and 
GIS Mapping of Postal estates could enhance the prospects and popularity of heritage 
Postal buildings. Therefore, while urging the Ministry of Finance to factor in these critical 
aspects during the process of fund allocation, the Committee recommend the Department 
to propose for a separate allocation on GIS Survey and GIS Mapping of Postal estates 
while simultaneously pursuing for increasing allocations towards the sche me on Estates 
Management. The Committee would like to be apprised of the actions taken and progress 
made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The Department has geo -tagged its own buildings in the Government Land Information 
System (GLIS Portal) towards this end.  Further, all post offices are mapped on the Gati 
Shakti portal. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt dated 09.06.2025)  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
INDIA POST PAYMENTS BANK (IPPB) 
The India Post Payment Bank has been set up with the objective of achieving financial 
inclusion in a cost -effective way through access to barrier -free financial services in the 
unbanked and underbanked areas of the Country. The Committee note that not only has 
the IPPB been providing accessible and affordable banking services at the last mile but 
it has also led to an increase in the rural banking infrastructure by almost 2.5 times. 
Further, the Committee also observe that while IPPB has been focusing on Me rchant 
acquisitions for building a digital transaction ecosystem; its combination with the 
Department of Posts has led to the creation of a Phygital Platform for rural India wherein 
Financial Services have been embedded with Government Services to provide a range 
of services to citizens at the last mile. The Committee also appreciate the fact that out of 
an IPPB customer base of over 11 crore, 77% are based in rural areas and 48% of the 
customer base comprises women, besides about 3.6 crore Savings accounts being held 
by DBT beneficiaries. 
 The Department also informed that a major challenge in the implementation of the 
IPPB Business model has been the limited availability of avenues for revenue generation 
but this was overcome through streams such as Government -to-Citizen services with 
which the IPPB turned profitable in the 4th year of its operations. Regarding adoption of a 
single structure in IPPB, the Department submitted that this has been addressed through 
the IPPB App ensuring effective utilization of Post Office Savings Bank account with other 
IPPB accounts. The Department, however, submitted that due to variety of services 
offered under the Post Office Savings Bank as  compared to only Savings account 

15 
 
services offered under IPPB, merging services of the two entities is frought with practical 
difficulties. 
The Committee note that Hon’ble Finance Minister, during her Budget Speech 
2025-26, announced that India Post with 1.5 lakh rural post offices, complemented by the 
India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) and a vast network of 2.4 lakh Dak Sevaks, will be 
repositioned to act as a catalyst for the rural economy. The Budget Speech 2025-26 also 
included announcemen ts regarding deepening and expansion of the services of India 
Post Payments Bank in rural areas. Taking note of the performance of the Scheme on 
India Post Payments Bank so far; and in the light of Budget announcements 2025-26, the 
Committee are hopeful that with proper planning and implementation of set targets, the 
Scheme on IPPB has the potential to realize the goal of financial inclusion in the remotest 
of areas while also generating revenue for sustaining itself. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend the Department to make earnest efforts towards achieving its targets 
regarding expansion of  its banking services availability to all the villages in order to 
provide financial inclusion coverage within a 5 km radius; development of merchant 
ecosystem under the Scheme on Pradhan Mantri Vishwakarma; training and capacity 
building of its end users; and providing doorstep services to customers through Hand -
held Micro ATMs and Biometric devices. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
proposed roadmap and progress made in this direction. 
Reply of the Government 
(1) Expansion of banking services availability to all the villages in order to provide 
financial inclusion coverage within a 5 km radius:- 
Under the "Banking for All" initiative, with concerted efforts IPPB has expanded its 
network from 06 access points since inception to 1,64,237 access points to provide 
financial inclusion coverage to 98.31% of the villages within a 5 km radius. 
Through 1.89 Lakh GDS and Postman, the IPPB banking services has its ubiquitous 
presence at the doorstep of the rural populace. The task of providing Financial Inclusion 
Coverage of the remaining villages within the 5 km radius will be completed in 2025-26. 
(ii) Development of merchant ecosystem under the Scheme on Pradhan Mantri  
Vishwakarma:- 
PM Vishwakarma scheme under the Ministry of MSME envisages beneficiaries of 17 
different professions to be digitized and equipped with UPI QR.  To this end, India Post 
Payments Bank has launched Merchant Onboarding Services in January 2023 in order 
to create a digital ecosystem across the country. The Bank is empowering merchants with 
interoperable UPI QR and android based dedicated merchant App for hassle free receipt 
of UPI payments and audio alert for every UPI transaction received. By onboarding 
merchants and enabling digital transactions like UPI, IPPB promotes cashless 
transactions and economic digitization in rural and semi-urban areas. 
Since the launch of services, Bank is moving towards digital empowerment of rural 
economy as most of the target segment where other Banks/ Payment service providers 
(PSPs) are yet to show their presence in digital ecosystem. Bank has on -boarded more 
than 24 Lakh Merchants wh o are equipped with digital mode of payments for their day -
to-day transactions. The Bank has tied up with various organizations to offer digital 
banking and other services to the beneficiaries under different schemes.  

16 
 
The Bank is focusing on onboarding of PM Vishwakarma beneficiaries as IPPB 
Merchants and enabling them for digital mode of transactions. Out of a large base of 
around 27 Lakh PM Vishwakarma beneficiaries, IPPB has onboarded 60,000+ 
Beneficiaries as IPPB Merchants. Since the toolkit of PM Vishwakarma beneficiaries are 
being delivered through the workforce of India Post, Bank is simultaneously making 
efforts to onboard the beneficiaries as merchants in order to have more penetration 
across the segment.  The Bank i s coordinating with concerned Urban Local Bodies for 
effective implementation of the scheme. 
(iii) Training and capacity building of its end users:- 
IPPB aims to improve end user skills so they can serve customers better, use banking 
systems confidently, and support the bank's goal of reaching every household with safe 
and easy financial services. 
As on 31st March, 2025, IPPB has trained and certified more than 4 lakh+ users 
(4,04,358) including both Finacle and MATM users. 
At regular intervals, IPPB also undertakes refresher trainings of end users. Refresher 
trainings are undertaken by Master trainers with handholding from IPPB officers. 
(iv) Providing doorstep services to customers through hand held Micro ATMs and 
Biometric devices 
Postman/Gramin Dak Sevaks are equipped with Smartphones and Biometric devices to 
deliver doorstep services, including Paperless Aadhaar seeded account opening, Cash 
deposit/ withdrawal, DBT facilitation, Child Aadhaar Enrolment , Digital Life Certificate, 
General Insurance, Aadhaar enabled Payment System ( AEPS) etc. These doorstep 
services enhance individual access and improve public service by targeted delivery to the 
rightful customer by utilizing Aadhaar Authentication. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt dated 09.06.2025) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
DAK GHAR NIRYAT KENDRA 
The Economic Survey 2024-25 has stated that recognizing the relevance of e-commerce 
exports, the Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) 2023 laid down provisions for fostering cross -
border digital trade and promoting e-commerce and other emerging export channels. One 
such scheme for promoting e -commerce exports through Postal route is the ‘Dak Niryat 
Kendra’. The Department has apprised the Committee that the Sub-scheme on Mail 
Operations under its Scheme on Postal Operations has a provision for international 
relations and global business under which activities regarding se tting up of Dak Ghar 
Niryat Kendras; establishment / upgradation of International Business Centres;  and 
Upgradation of Foreign Post Offices (FPOs) /Sub Foreign Post Offices (SFPOs) are 
included. The Committee note that the aims and objectives under the sub -Scheme on 
Mail Operations are all directed towards augmenting revenue from export through postal 
channels by strengthening and upgrading infrastructure of FPOs / SFPOs; establishing 
Dak Ghar Niryat Kendras (DNKs) in every district of the Country; and enhancing booking 
volume of International Articles by increasing handling capacity and ensuring high 
standard of service quality at FPOs / SFPOs. 
The Department submitted that it has identified 1013 DNKs at district level across 
the Country. The Committee, however, note that for the third quarter of FY 2024-25, even 
though the physical target for number of operational DNKs in FY 2024-25 was 25, among 

17 
 
them only 2 were made operational and against a target of ugrading 2 FPOs / SFPOs, 
none were upgraded in the said quarter. Further, the Committee note that Dak Ghar Niryat 
Kendras (DNKs) have been established in 750 districts across the Country, however, the 
Department has furnished no timeline for realizing the goal of establishing Dak Ghar 
Niryat Kendra in every district of the country. Acknowledging the potential for revenue 
generation and business proliferation through e -commerce exports undertaken by D ak 
Ghar Niryat Kendras, the Committee recommend the Department to perform, in a time 
bound manner, a district -wise assessment of requirements expressed by exporters for 
setting up DNKs and accordingly, draw a timeline for prioritizing and setting up Dak Ghar 
Niryat Kendras in every district of the country. The Committee would like to be informed 
about the actions taken and progress made in this regard. The Committee would also like 
to be apprised of the status of pending proposals, if any, received by the Department from 
Postal Circles for setting up DNKs. 
Reply of the Government 
The Department has established 1013 Dak Ghar  Niryat Kendras (DNKs) across 761 
districts, selected based on export potential and Circle inputs. Proposals for the remaining 
districts will be considered upon receipt from the Circles. 
All 1013 DNKs are in operation from the Department of Posts (DOP) side. However, in 
some areas, booking activity is poor  due to low customer demand. Marketing and 
awareness campaigns are being conducted to boost commercial export through the 
postal channel at all DNKs. The Postal Directorate is also organizing workshops for 
marketing executives and divisional heads for capacity building. Meetings with exporters 
are organized in Circles to raise awareness of Dak Ghar Niryat Kendra. 
Export bookings have increased from 3.66 lakh shipments (Export value - INR 78.70 
crore) in 2023 -24 to 4.10 lakh (Export value - INR 102 crore) in 2024 -25, indicating 
growing trust in DNKs. Out of the INR 3.0 crore allocated for DNK/IBC upgradation in 
2024-25, INR 1.96 crore has been utilized in FY 2024 -25. The proposal for setting up 
DNKs in districts where none currently exist will be examined based on the establishment 
of new DNKs or the relocation of existing DNKs, contingent on export potential. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt dated 09.06.2025) 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 13 of Chapter – I. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
GENDER BUDGET UNDER DEMAND NO. 12 
Gender Budgeting is an effective mechanism to monitor planning and policies of the 
Department from a gender perspective and it can prove beneficial in mainstreaming 
women’s concerns and ensuring gender equality in the long run. The Committee note that 
allocation made under the Gender Budget towards the Scheme on Estates Management 
from the year 2021 -22 up to 2023 -24 were utilized satisfactorily. The Committee, 
however, note that no allocations were made under the Gender Budget during the year 
2020-21. The Department informed that there have been no instances of ‘nil’ expenditure 
under gender budget from the year 2021-22. Regarding the impact of a separate Gender 
Budget on the female workforce of the Department and on the female customers, the 
Department submitted that in order to provide a caring environment at the work place to 
the female employees, separate ladies toilet and feeding rooms in various offices across 
India are being constructed under the Estates Management scheme and this benefits 
thousands of female employees of the Department and its female customers. Further, it 

18 
 
was also submitted that under the Estates Management scheme, since FY 2021-22, 146 
ladies toilets and 41 feeding rooms have been constructed. The Department further 
apprised the Committee that carving out a separate Gender Budget Component (GBC) 
in the Postal Sector has helped in providing a congenial and welcoming environment to 
its female workforce. It has also enabled young mothers to attend office. 
 The Committee, however, note that from FY 2020 -21 up to December, 
2024, the Department has been able to construct only 146 ladies toilets and only 41 
feeding rooms in post offices across the Country and that the Department has failed to 
specify the number of female employees that were trained under the Scheme on Human 
Resource Management. Taking note of the importance of the Gender Budget component 
under the Schemes of the Department, the Committee recommend the Department to 
make whole hearted efforts towards achieving targets set under the designated Schemes 
and to ensure that the budget earmarked under the Gender Budget component is utilized 
for its intended purpose and the directions of the Government regarding inclusivity and 
gender balance to mainstrea m women’s concerns in policies are implemented in letter 
and spirit. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
In alignment with the Government's broader objectives of promoting gender equality and 
addressing the specific needs of women in the workforce, the Department has taken a 
significant step by establishing a Gender Budget Cell at the field level. This initia tive is 
aimed at institutionalizing gender-responsive budgeting practices to ensure that financial 
planning and resource allocation actively contribute to the empowerment and welfare of 
women employees. The Gender Budget Cell is tasked with identifying are as where 
targeted funding can improve workplace conditions, enhance safety, support professional 
development, and promote work-life balance for women. By integrating gender concerns 
into the budgeting process, the Department seeks to create a more inclusiv e and 
equitable work environment, reflecting its commitment to both effective governance and 
social responsibility. This proactive approach not only ensures better utilization of funds 
but also strengthens institutional mechanisms for long-term gender mainstreaming within 
the organization. 
Department of Posts remains committed to aligning its initiatives with the broader goals 
of the Gender Budget and ensuring that capacity-building efforts support gender equity in 
both workforce development and service delivery. The year-wise details of the number of 
women employees trained from FY 2020-21 to 2024-25 is as under: 
S. No Financial Year No. of Women Employee Trained 
1 2020-21 26586 
2 2021-22 25215 
3 2022-23 43330 
4 2023-24 63447 
5 2024-25 56934 
 
Department of Posts is sensitive to the needs of its women employees and customers. In 
order to provide a caring environment at the work place to them, the Department is 
constructing separate ladies’ toilet and feeding rooms throughout India. As on 

19 
 
31.03.2025, 184 ladies’ toilets and 59 feeding rooms have been constructed. There is 
provision for construction of ladies’ toilets in all newly constructed buildings. Almost 56% 
departmental buildings have separate ladies’ toilets. The Department is constructing the 
same in remaining buildings in a phased manner as per availability of funds. The Year 
wise fund allocated and utilization w.r.t Gender Budget is as follows: 
(Rs. In crore) 
Scheme Component Year Budget 
Allocated 
Expenditure Utilization (%) 
Gender Concerns 2021-22 0.11 0.10 90.9 
2022-23 1.00 0.95 95 
2023-24 1.444 1.441 99.79 
2024-25 1.10 1.10 100 
2025-26 1.00 Ongoing 
 (Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt dated 09.06.2025) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM 
The Committee note that out of a total of 1,410,147 complaints received by the 
Department during FY 2023 -24, 1,385,551 complaints were resolved whereas 24,596 
complaints are still pending for resolution. The Committee were informed that stringent 
internal targets for grievance redressal have been set with most of the complaints to be 
resolved, with the consent of the customer, within 3 -7 days. The Department also 
informed that fortnightly review of grievances, quality of resolution and appeals by senior 
officers in the Circles is being undertaken. Further, the Department has stated that review 
is being conducted at the level of the Postal Services Board at regular intervals and it is 
making continuous efforts to tighten the process for resolution of public grievances across 
all Channels. 
The Committee, however, note that as per the data provided, the top 5 Circles with 
maximum number of pending complaints in decreasing order are Maharashtra, Delhi, 
Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat and Haryana, respectively. Taking note of the huge pendency of 
complaints from FY 2023 -24, the Committee recommend the Department to ensure a 
strict monitoring mechanism for complaint redressal and to fix responsibility in cases of 
inordinate delay.   The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken for 
reducing the number of grievances pending with the Department of Posts and the timeline 
set for addressing the same. 
Reply of the Government 
Continuous monitoring of grievances resolution and guidance to end users for adherence 
to SOP has been maintained by the Department. Complaint resolution time norms for 
different types of complaints have been defined for granular monitoring and greater 
responsiveness in complaint resolution. Aspirational internal targets for grievance 
redressal have been set with most of the complaints to be resolved, with the consent of 
the customer, within 3-7 days. The Department is currently aligning its system and people 
to adhere to the revised norms and resolution of complaints. For expeditious settlement 

20 
 
of customer grievances and quality resolution, Department has scheduled fortnightly 
review of grievances, qual ity of resolution and appeals in the Circles and at the 
Directorate.  
While the average complaint resolution time has come down to 8 days some cases 
take longer for resolution/closure due to involvement of external agencies and detailed 
inquiries. As on date 31.03.2025, out of 14 ,33,403 cases received during the period 
01.04.2024 to 31.03.2025, no case is pending for over 180 days.  
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt dated 09.06.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
Further, the Committee note that grievances of Postal Life Insurance (PLI) and Rural 
Postal Life Insurance (RPLI) customers are settled at Central Processing Centres in all 
Head Post Offices across the country, in Divisional Offices at District Level and i n 
Regional/Circle Offices at State Level. The Committee, however, observe that since 
PLI/RPLI does not come under the purview of Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority of India (IRDAI), there is no provision of insurance Ombudsman in postal circles. 
Taking note of the absence of an Ombudsman, the Committee recommend the 
Department to formulate a mechanism to protect the interests of policy holders under PLI 
and RPLI. Similarly, the Committee recommend that in order to regulate, promote and 
ensure gr owth and revenue of PLI and RPLI accrued from services offered by the 
Department, it should ensure customer -friendly and business -like approach. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the actions taken by the Department in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Postal Life Insurance (PLI) and Rural Postal Life Insurance (RPLI) are life insurance 
schemes administered by Department of Posts. The following provisions have been made 
to protect the interest of policy holders of PLI and RPLI and make the services customer-
friendly and more professional: - 
i)  Citizens’ Charter norms regarding policy servicing and grievance redressal for 
PLI/RPLI policy holders have been prescribed, which is in line with industry 
practice. 
ii)  To simplify the process of acceptance of new proposals and facilitate timely 
settlement of claims, the levels and limits of approving authorities for acceptance 
of new proposals and settlement of claims have been revised and decentralized to 
subordinate units.  
iii)  Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) have been prescribed to enable Post 
Office staff to deal with various issues being faced in processing of different types 
of financial and non -financial service requests related to PLI/RPLI. These SOPs 
help in facilitating timely and efficient resolution of service requests. Further, these 
procedural SOPs have been translated into major regional languages for ease of 
our field staff all over the country. 
iv)  Other measures taken by Department of Posts for simplification of processes and 
improving after sales services include:  
a. Generation of e-PLI bond through DigiLocker, 
b. Payment of premium of multiple policies by clubbing them together, 

21 
 
c. Customers can download their premium paid certificate,  
d. Generation of maturity notice and required claim form in advance so that maturity 
benefits to customers are received on time,  
e. Generation of SMS & e-Mail alerts,  
f. Servicing of PLI policies through IVRS/call Centre from anywhere in the country,  
g. Direct payment/disbursement of claims to claimants in their Post Office/ Bank 
accounts etc. 
h. Online payment of premium. Multiple digital payment options of debit card, credit 
card, net banking, UPI(QR), NACH, IPPB have also been provided to the 
customers. 
v)  Grievance handling: - Although Ombudsman is not available for PLI/RPLI, there are 
several channels for redressal of grievances related to servicing of PLI/RPLI policies, 
as follows: 
(i) A Call Centre has been established, wherein information about status of PLI/RPLI 
policies, lodging of complaint, status of complaint, submission of service requests 
including updating of mobile number & email ID and agent details may be sought by PLI 
and RPLI policy holders. This service is available over toll free no. 1800-2666-868. 
(ii)      Grievances can be lodged through the following online modes:  
a. Customer Relationship Management (CRM) Portal: CRM portal is centrally 
monitored at Postal Circle and Directorate level for settlement of complaints. The link is   
https://www.indiapost.gov.in/VAS/Pages/complaintregistration.aspx 
b. Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System  (CPGRAMS) 
Portal: The link is https://pgportal.gov.in 
c. Customers can also put forth suggestions and raise their concerns through email 
or various social media platforms including X (formerly Twitter), Facebook, Instagram etc. 
(iii)  With the aim of providing a mechanism to legal assigns of the policyholder in case of 
rejection of death claim, a new set of procedures have been prescribed in case of 
PLI/RPLI, wherein the claimant can appeal to the next higher authority in the Department 
of Posts. 
(iv) To further prioritize quality and prompt handling of grievances, Service Level 
Agreement (SLAs) have been prescribed for timely resolution of grievances. 
(v)  There is also a well -established escalation matrix for grievance redressal for 
PLI/RPLI:   
(a)  Customers can visit any post office – Branch Post Office (BO), Sub Post Office (SO) 
or Head Post Office (HO) across the country to lodge their complaint through the 
postmaster / in-charge of the office.  
(b)  If the grievance cannot be resolved at BO level, customer can approach the next 
higher office i.e. SO or in the case of SO, he/she can approach HO.  
(c) In case the issue is not resolved at HO level, the customer can address the Divisional 
Head (Senior Superintendent of Post Offices / Superintendent of Post Offices) at district 
level. 

22 
 
(d) in the event of non -resolution of complaint at Divisional level, the customer can 
approach the concerned Regional Office (O/o the Regional Post Master General) and 
then Circle Office (O/o the Chief Postmaster General) at state level.  
(e) In case the customer is not satisfied with the grievance redressal at Circle level, he/she 
can approach the Directorate of Postal Life Insurance (PLI), followed by Director General 
Postal Services (DGPS) and then Secretary (Posts). 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt dated 09.06.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
UNIVERSAL SERVICE OBLIGATION (USO) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF POSTS 
The Committee note that the Department of Posts has been undertaking activities to fulfill 
its universal service obligation through the implementation of its Schemes on Postal 
Operations and Estates Management. The Committee also note that the core USO 
activities undertaken by the Department comprises of infrastructure development of Post 
Offices; satisfactory and reliable services to customers; service conditions and 
construction of staff quarters in far-flung areas for employees posted there; and providing 
a congenial environment for customer transactions. 
 The Committee observe that the ability of the Department of Posts to provide last 
mile connectivity has helped further the reach of the social security Schemes of the 
Government of India aimed at providing financial inclusion. The Committee note that the 
Department is providing immense potential for expanding business avenues through 
competitive pricing and the gamut of services offered to different strata of the Society. 
While appreciating the earnestness of the Department of Posts in increasing outreach in 
the rural areas, the Committee urge the Department to take strategic steps towards 
expanding its customer base and strengthen its revenue generation through services 
such as E -commerce, Parcel delivery, international exports etc. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the steps taken to achieve this objective and also the roadmap laid 
down for the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Some of the measures taken to strengthen the postal network and revenue generation 
are as under: 
(a) Banking Services to the Unbanked and underbanked areas: 
i. For providing Banking Facility within 5 Km of all villages by brick -and-mortar Post 
Offices with IPPB Touch Points, Cabinet approved 5746 new Post Offices on 
22.03.2023, out of which around 5657 Post Offices, have become operational 
so far. 
ii. 4903 new post offices opened in areas affected by Left Wing Extremism 
(LWE) between 2017 -18 to 2021 -22 (Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, 
Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Telangana and Uttar 
Pradesh). 
iii. To ensure Financial inclusion in 7 Left Wing Extremism (LWE) districts in 
Chhattisgarh, setting up of 294 new Branch Post offices (BOs)  has been 
agreed upon by Department of Expenditure. These BOs are expected to be 
opened in the financial year 2025-26. 
 
 

23 
 
(b) Parcel & e-Commerce: 
Department has implemented various measures to enhance reliability and efficiency in 
parcel operations and support e -commerce. These include operational measures such 
as: 
i. A network of 190 Parcel hubs (PHs) has been set-up PAN India 
ii. 234 Nodal Delivery Centres (NDC) have been set up for exclusive and expeditious 
delivery of parcels using two and four-wheeler vehicles 
iii. A dedicated Road Transport Network, connecting all states and the Parcel Hubs 
(PHs) located therein is being operated to ensure timely and expeditious 
transportation of parcels. 80 (40*2) Eighty national routes covering over 50,000 km 
per day are operational, supplemented by state-level routes Postal Road Transport 
network has been designed to provide daily connectivity to 400+ cities. 
iv. Parcel Packaging Units (PPUs) have been set up in 1,408 post offices PAN India, 
offering packaging services, including various -sized packages and sealing 
materials, to benefit retail customer. 
v. The Department of Posts is actively collaborating with various e-market places and 
has established business partnerships with major e -Commerce players for the 
delivery of their consignments/parcel in NER. Under this collaboration, 
consignments are seamlessly transmitted and delivered by the Department to all 
states in the region. Upto, 31.03.2025 1,66,531 consignments successfully 
booked, generating a revenue of Rs. 1.77 crore. 
c) Export Promotion through postal channels: 
In order to promote e -Commerce exports through postal network, Department of Posts 
has set-up Dak Ghar  Niryat Kendras (DNKs) at identified Post Offices in the districts. 
1013 locations have been set up as DNKs across the country so far. As on 24.04.2025, 
8.53 lakh shipments with export value Rs. 202 crore have been exported. 
Dak Ghar Niryat Kendra initiative has received Special Jury Recognition at the UPU 
1st Trade Post Award ceremony 2023  for 'Gender Trade inclusion through the post' 
empowering MSMEs, women and underserved communities through innovative Postal 
solutions 
The Department  has set the priority of organizing Dist rict and State level exhibition 
regularly to promote Philately amongst the public. National level letter writing competitions 
are being organized to encourage habit of letter writing under the flagship program "Dhai 
Akhar". For promotion of aptitude and research in philately, scholarshi ps are being 
awarded each year to eligible students under 'Deen Dayal SPARSH Yojana'. 
Modernization of National Philately Museum into National Postal Museum is under way. 
Efforts are also being initiate d to increase Philately Revenue by Digitizing the Philately 
Bureau, opening of Philatelic Deposit Accounts ( PDAs) online and introducing new and 
innovative products through e-Post Office.  
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt dated 09.06.2025) 
***** 
 
 
 

24 
 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THECOMMITTEEDO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT  BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES  
OF THE  GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT – RECEIPTS, RECOVERIES, 
RATE OF REMUNERATIONS & REVENUE DEFICIT 
 
The Committee note that Mail, Parcel & E -commerce services and Financial Services 
being provided on behalf of other wings of the Government etc. form the key sources for 
augmenting revenue generation of the Department. Further, the figures for targets and 
achievements under Revenue Receipts at RE Stage for the financial years 2020 -21 to 
2024-25 are Rs. 10632.50 crore out of Rs. 12330.05 crore; Rs. 10860.80 crore out of Rs. 
13398.34 crore; Rs. 10917.89 crore out of Rs. 12230.41; Rs. 11321.35 crore out of Rs.  
11408.04 crore; and Rs.8039.01 crore (till December, 2024) out of Rs. 12207.01 crore. 
The Committee observe that though the amount of revenue receipts achieved by the 
Department has grown in absolute terms from financial year 2020-21 to FY 2023-24, there 
has been constant under-achievement of the set targets under Revenue Receipts for the 
said duration. Furthermore, during financial year 2024 -25, only 65.85% of the target set 
under Revenue Receipts has been achieved by the Department so far, till December,  
2024. 
The Committee understand that major Recoveries of the Department are mainly 
from Postal Life Insurance (PLI), Customs duties, and Input Tax credit from GST and that 
a total amount of Rs. 97.69 crore worth outstanding dues from other Government 
Departments have still not been recovered by the Department during the year financial 
2024-25. 
 Regarding remuneration on Savings Bank Business, the Department informed that 
the rate of remuneration has not changed since the year 2019. The Committee note that 
the Department has accrued significant losses in maintaining accounts under Savings 
schemes with the percentage losses under the unit cost of operations being 51.98% 
under Live accounts; 54.84% under Silent accounts; and 62.07% under Savings 
Certificate. The Committee further understand that despite there being a rise in the 
allocations as well as recoveries and receipts of the Department from the financial year 
2020-21, the Revenue Deficit of the Department has also risen sharply from Rs. 17695.09 
crore (Actual) during the financial year 2020 -21 to Rs. 26141.51 crore (BE) during FY 
2025-26. 
While noting that the rising revenue deficit is an outcome of under-achievement of 
Revenue Receipts, outstanding payments under Recoveries and losses accrued under 
Remuneration, the Committee are of the view that the increasing revenue deficit is 
definitely a cause of concern as it nullifies the progress made in revenue generated from 
services offered under the Department of Posts. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Department to adopt sound business principles and prudent commercial practices for 
improving their performance in from Mail, Parcel, E-commerce services and to vigorously 
pursue with the concerned Ministries for recovery of outstanding dues pending with them. 
The Committee call upon the Department to eagerly pursue with the Ministry of Finan ce 
for obtaining final outcome of the  recommendations of the Expert Group Committee of 
the Ministry which was constituted to revise the 2019 rate of remuneration offered on 
services related to Savings Bank Business. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the progress made in this regard. 

27 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
PARCEL AND MAILS OPERATIONS: 
Department undertook a Mail and Parcel Optimization Project for an overall 
transformation of product, processes and network to increase its market share in the 3PL 
(3rd Party Logistics) market. The project involves complete overhaul of the tech and 
processes for parcels in lines with the industry requirements. This will help in garnering 
increased revenues and traffic for parcels. Additionall y, Circles have been directed to 
contact Educational Institutions, Legal Institutions, and sellers of One District One Product 
(ODOP) and GI Products for onboarding as parcel customers. Further, the Department is 
in touch with various ministries like  Ministry of Rural Development  (MoRD), Ministry of 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) and Ministry of Cooperation for garnering 
parcel business from small entrepreneurs, cooperatives, SHGs, etc. 
The Department is also focusing on revamping the transmission and delivery 
infrastructure. The co-location and merger of mail processing hubs is currently underway, 
which will help reduce operational costs by shifting away from high-rent railway premises 
and improving efficiency through the integration of various mail processing units. 
Centralized hubs facilitate better planning of efficient routes for the Mail Motor Service 
(MMS), leading to enhanced route optimization, reduced transportation costs, improv ed 
space utilization, and greater flexibility for future expansion.  A comprehensive Logistics 
Infrastructure Project is being placed in the current financial year before the Public 
Investment Board (PIB). 
CITIZEN CENTRIC SERVICES 
(a) Post Office Passport Seva  Kendra (POPSK): Dues for passport application services 
provided through POPSKs have been pending since December 2024. The Department of Posts  
(DoP) has been following up on claims for the outstanding amounts with the Ministry of External 
Affairs(MEA).                                                                      
(b) Aadhaar Centres: An amount of Rs. 14.78 crore, which was pending with the Unique 
Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) for the period from September 2023 to August 2024, was 
received in July and December 2024, covering payments up to November 2024.  
(c) Ministry of New and Renewable Energy: Out of an amount of Rs. 17.36 Crore, Rs. 
14.45 Crore was recovered in January 2025 from the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy for PM Surya Ghar Yojana registrations done by India Post in February and March 
2024. Matter regarding pending payments is being taken up regularly with MNRE. 
POST OFFICE SAVINGS BANK 
Department had a meeting with Ministry of Finance on 20.05.2025 to discuss the 
implementation of recommendations of the Expert Group Committee of the Ministry for 
revision of the rates of remuneration for Saving Bank and Cash Certificates work done by 
the Department as an agency function, since the rates were last revised in 2019-20. The 
matter is under the consideration of the Ministry of Finance. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt dated 09.06.2025) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
IT INDUCTION AND MODERNIZATION 
The Committee note that during FY 2024 -25 against RE Stage allocation of Rs. 783.67 
crore towards the Scheme on IT Induction and Modernization, the Department could not 

28 
 
utilize even half of the amount as they spent only Rs. 240.77 crore till December, 2024. 
Further, the least utilization of allocation is seen under the Network and Network -NE 
activities of the Scheme in which the Department could spend only Rs. 8.30 crore (till 
January, 2025) out of Rs. 191.66 crore allocated towards Network. Similarly, the 
Department could incur an expenditure of only Rs. 2.07 crore (till January, 2025) against 
the allocation of Rs. 66.34 crore earmarked for Network -NE. Regarding hurdles f aced 
during implementation of the Scheme, the Department informed that the involvement of 
several stakeholders such as IPPB, Centre for Excellence in Postal Technologies, NIC, 
BSNL and Functional Divisions etc., resulted in coordination issues among these 
stakeholders. The Department has informed that in order to resolve the problem, regular 
meetings among stake holders are being ensured and a Project Monitoring Group (PMG) 
at the level of Secretary (Posts) has been constituted to monitor the progress on we ekly 
basis. Taking note of the efforts made by the Department, the Committee would like to be 
apprised of the outcome of meetings held under the Project Monitoring Group regarding 
consultations with stakeholders and also about the tangible output with resp ect to fund 
utilization and realization of physical targets under the Scheme on IT Induction and 
Modernization. The Committee would like to be informed about the latest progress made 
in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Though fund utilization status up to December -2024 during the FY 2024 -25 was not up 
to the mark, however, a total of Rs.746.49 Crore has been spent out of allotment of 
Rs.748 Crore under IT Modernization Project 2.0, which is more than 99% of the outlay. 
Further, with regard to less expenditure in Network and Network -NE activities of the 
scheme for the financial year 2024 -25 (till January -2025), it is informed that in the FY 
2024-25, a total amount of Rs.109.13 Cr expenditure incurred under Network and 
Rs.66.34 Cr expenditure was incurred under Network-North East in the last quarter only 
due to non-submission of bills by BSNL in accordance with the timelines.   
The Project Management Group (PMG) is monitoring the progress under IT 2.0 on regular 
basis. PMG has representatives from all Functional Divisions and the Centre for 
Excellence in Postal Technology (CEPT). This ensures that there is coordination between 
the user Divisions and the software development unit i.e. CEPT and the requirements of 
all Functional Divisions are properly addressed in the design of the IT 2.0 solution. PMG 
has fortnightly meetings and it monitors the progress in development of software as well 
as the deployment of required infrastructure and timely completion of various activities to 
ensure proper rollout of the IT 2.0 Project. Pilot phase of IT 2.0 rollout has been 
initiated in the Karnataka Circle on 15/05/2025. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt dated 09.06.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
The Committee note with serious concern that against a quarterly target of upgrading 
network hardware in 500 Departmental Post Offices for continuous network access, nil 
achievements were recorded. Similarly, the Committee are surprised to find that agains t 
a target of 50000 post offices for rolling out eKYC solutions, only 14 targets could be 
achieved by the Department so far during FY 2024 -25. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the reasons behind this underperformance. Moreover, recognizing the 
importance of a robust IT network to increase business and thereby revenue in Postal 

29 
 
Services in Department of Posts, the Committee recommend the Department to make all 
out efforts to achieve its physical targets and also to ensure that budgetary allocations 
under the Scheme are utilized optimally. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
developments in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Project Steering Committee had given approval for the project proposal for Network 
under IT 2.0. A letter of Intent (Lol) along with Terms of Reference (ToR) Document was 
issued to BSNL for managing and monitoring the DoP Enterprise Network on a 'Turn-Key' 
basis for all the Departmental Post Offices/locations with effect from 01.04.2023. 
Thereafter, extension of the Contract/Purchase Order with BSNL for another one year (i.e 
from 01-04-2024 to 31-03-2025), on the same rates and terms & condition, at a contract 
cost of Rs. 234 Crore (exclusive of GST) with a 10% buffer was considered as Tender 
processed by BSNL for supply of new network hardware could not be materialized in the 
year 2024-25. 
Fresh tender by BSNL is under process in the current financial year (2025 -2026), 
which was re -floated on 21.11.2024 and opened on 20.12.2024 and is currently at the 
finalization stage. Hence, for quarterly target of upgrading network hardware in 
Departmental Post Offices for continuous network access, nil achievements were 
recorded. 
 Further, a target of 25,074 Post Offices for rolling out eKYC solutions has been 
achieved by the Department so far during FY 2024-25. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt dated 09.06.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
ESTATES MANAGEMENT 
The Committee note that the objectives of the Scheme on Estates Management are to 
focus on building Postal infrastructure and renovating existing infrastructure while 
achieving sustainable development goals. The Committee observe that the Department 
has be en facing major hurdles in Scheme implementation in the form of delays in 
obtaining approval from Municipal Corporations, issues during tendering processes and 
depleting manpower of the Civil Wing. Regarding assets owned by the Department of 
Posts, the Committee has been apprised that a detailed report containing particulars of 
the Post Office Estates and dispersed plots of land owned by the Department is under 
preparation. 
 Further, as per report of the third-party evaluation conducted by the Indian Institute 
of Public Administration (IIPA), the Scheme on Estates Management was ranked the least 
performing as per the users and as the second worst performing by the employees. 
Taking note of the status of implementation of the Scheme on Estates Management and 
of the Estates currently held by the Department of Posts, the Committee recommend the 
Department to explore the idea of harnessing the commercial potential of assets and to 
prepare a proposal for monetization of av ailable assets in order to self -sustain and curb 
the rising revenue deficit being faced by the Department. 
 
 

30 
 
Reply of the Government 
Employee and user dissatisfaction had been observed in the third -party evaluation 
conducted by IIPA due to paucity of funds that led to poorly maintained buildings, so the 
Department of Posts had scaled up the targets for building renovation and constructi on. 
The Department will be able to fully utilize the funds provided under the Estates 
Management Scheme (2021-22 to 2025-26). Further, significantly higher outlay is being 
sought under the scheme for the next 5 years, i.e. up to 2030-31. 
The Department will be hiring a consultant to advise on the strategy to develop/redevelop 
real estate assets of the department and recommending appropriate mode for each 
project for maximizing their revenue potential.  
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt dated 09.06.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
QUALITY OF SERVICE 
The sub-Scheme on ‘Quality of Service’ primarily involves certification of quality of service 
of post offices with the main activities of this Sub-scheme being – (i) improving quality of 
Delivery of all Postal Products and Services against standards define d; (ii) 
implementation of Service Delivery Excellence and standards viz Citizen’s Charter, Public 
Grievance Redressal and Service Delivery Capability; and (iii) implementation of Dynamic 
Queue Management System (DQMS) in Post Offices to reduce queuing and service time 
to citizens. The Department informed that the objective of the initiative is to develop a 
standard using which the delivery of service is improved over a period of time to reach a 
level where the quality of these services can be evaluated obje ctively by an outside 
agency. The Department also submitted that due to lack of capacity on the part of BIS , 
New Sevottam Certification in Circles is proving difficult and organizing surveillance audits 
is proving to be an uphill task in the light of chang ing systems of quality standards. 
Further, Department has also taken an alternative approach to Standardization and 
Service Delivery Excellence by approaching Quality Council of India for Standardization 
of process, Infrastructure & Service delivery and Development of a self -evaluating 
system; which will enable adherence to service standards across the network over a 
period of time. The Department has submitted that the approach for the years 2025 -26 
onwards would be adopted as per the new methodology being devised currently. 
The Committee observed that as per the report of the Indian Institute of Public 
Administration (IIPA) regarding third party evaluation of the performance of the Schemes 
of the Department, the sub -Scheme on Quality of Service was rated as the best 
performing Scheme by beneficiaries / users, thus showing their satisfaction with the 
quality of postal services being delivered. The Committee are, however, concerned to 
note that none of the physical targets set against the indicators of ‘New Certification’ and 
‘Renewal’ under this sub -Scheme for the year 2024 -25, have been achieved so far. 
Considering the importance of qualitative service delivery and the pressing need for 
regular evaluation of quality of services, the Committee recommend the Department to 
expedite actions related to consultations with the Quality Council of India (QCI) and 
ensure that individual frameworks regarding ‘Standardization of process, infrastructure 
and service delivery’ as well as for ‘Self evaluating system’ are in place before the end of 
the current financial year. The Committee would like to be apprised of actions taken in 
this regard and the progress made therein. 
 

31 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Physical targets set for the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) driven certification could not 
be achieved due to constraints as per submission made above. To move ahead with 
effective quality of service, monitoring and evaluation system, the Department has drawn 
up an alternative approach to service delivery excellence with the support of the Quality 
Council of India (QCI). The Service Delivery Excellence Maturity Model has been 
approved by the Postal Services Board with further directions to engage all the business 
verticals and functional divisions to enable its implementation and use all across the post 
office network. The targets and activities for the quality of service sub-scheme will be set 
in line with these changes from 2025-26 onwards. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 10th Report/2025/ Bgt dated 09.06.2025) 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
 11 August, 2025  Chairperson, 
 20 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

32 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND  
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY- FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 11 th August, 2025 from 1530 hours to 1550              
hours in Committee Room No. ‘B, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY- Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
4. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
5. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
6. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai  Maadam 
7. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
8. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
9. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
10. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
11. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
12. Shri Devesh Shakya 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
13. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
14. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
15. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
16. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad  
17. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
18. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi   - Director 
3. Shri Amrish Kumar             - Deputy Secretary 
 

33 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee 
convened to consider and adopt one draft Subject Report relating to Ministry of 
Communications (Department of Posts) and four draft Action Taken Reports on Demands 
for Gran ts (2025 -26) relating to the Ministries/Departments under the  jurisdiction of the 
Committee. 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up the following five draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption:- 
 
(i) XXXX…..XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX 
(ii) XXXX…..XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX 
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Tenth 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2025-26)” relating to the 
Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts). 
(iv) XXXX….XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX 
(v) XXXX….XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX 
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without modifications. 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and present 
the same to the House during the current Session of Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
**** 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
XXXX- Matter not related to this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR TENTH REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by  the 
Government 
 
          Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1,2,4,5,6,8,11,12,14,15,16,17 and 18 
Total 13 
Percentage    72.22 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
         Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
        Rec. Sl. No.: NIL 
 
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
        Rec. Sl. No.: 3,7,9,10,13   
Total 05 
Percentage 27.77 
 
 