i 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Eleventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)'] 
 
 
NINTEENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
19 
 


ii 
 
NINTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Eleventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)'] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on           19.08.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on              19.08.2025 
 
                    LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                   NEW DELHI 
 
 
                 August 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 


iii 
 
CCIT No. 423 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 

iv 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................................................. (iii) 
INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................................................... (v) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………..................... 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………………………............... 13 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government……………………………….......................... 35 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration …………......... 36 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
are of interim in nature…......................................................................................... 37 
 APPENDICES  
I. Achievements in NER for 2024-25 under BIND Scheme 56 
II. Physical targets under BIND Scheme for NER 2025-26 58 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the 21st Sitting of the Committee held on 11.08.2025............................ 59 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Eleventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha). 61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Communications and 
Information Technology (2024-25)** 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
12. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
13. Shri Shafi Parambil 
14. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
15. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
16. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
17. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
18. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
19. Shri Devesh Shakya 
20. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Saket Gokhale* 
23. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
24. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
27. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Y.M. Kandpal  — Additional Secretary 
2.  Smt. A. Jyothirmayi  — Director 
3.  Smt. Rinky Singh                — Executive Officer  
 
**Committee constituted w.e.f. 26 th September, 2024 vide Para No.833 of Bulletin Part -II dated 
26th September, 2024. 
* Shri Saket Gokhale  has been nominated vide Para No. 853 of Bulletin Part –II dated 03 rd 
October, 2024. 
 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology 
(2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee, present this Nineteenth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in their Eleventh  Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘Demands for Grants (2025 -26)’ relating to 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
2. The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha  on 21st March, 2025 and laid on the Table  
of Rajya Sabha on 20th March, 2025. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  furnished 
their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh 
Report on 30th June, 2025. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on               
11th August, 2025. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
    11 August, 2025  Chairperson, 
 20  Sravana, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eleventh Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the ‘Demands for Grants (2025 -26)’ relating to the Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                          
21st March, 2025.  It contained 15 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes 
contained in the Report in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been 
received from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  and are categorized as 
under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:– 1,4,5,10,11,12,13,14 & 15 
 
  Total - 9 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total — NIL  
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL  
 
  Total – NIL  
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are of interim in nature  
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– 2,3,6,7,8 & 9 
 
  Total – 06 
Chapter-V 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given for the  
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and final 
action taken replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in                         
Chapter-V of this Report would be furnished to them at the earliest. 

2 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
BROADCASTING INFRASTRUCTURE AND NETWORK DEVELOPMENT (BIND) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
5. The Committee, in their Eleventh Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the Budgetary allocations for BIND Scheme, for the 
FY 2025-26 (at BE stage) is Rs. 500.00 crore. During the FY 2024 -25, the BE 
and RE allocations were Rs. 500.00 crore and Rs. 400 crore respectively. 
However, the actual expenditure till 30th January, 2025 was just Rs. 146.33 
crore which is 36.58 % of RE allocations. The actual expenditure during the 
years 2022 -23 and 2023 -24 were 50.77% and 72.71% of RE allocations , 
respectively.  
Reasons for under -utilisation, as furnished by the Ministry, inter -alia, include: 
(i) For distribution of 1.2 Lakh DTH Set Top Boxes for LWE remote & tribal 
areas of the Country, the financial Bids opened on 29.02.2024 and distribution 
of STBs through DBT scheme is being deliberated; (ii) The Ministry envisaged 
to float single tender for complete earth station at DTH Pitampura (C Band) - 
SITC of equipment ’s (Compression and monitoring System equipment etc.); 
(ii)  Certain administrative reasons halted the completion of TV tower at 
Amritsar, shifting of Transmitter and other associated equipments; (iii)  
Specification drafting is under process for setting up of Geo Diversity Centre 
for DD DTH platform similar to main site capacity; (iv) For expansion of DD 
Free Dish Platform by SITC of additional two streams with RF System at 
Earth Station, Todapur, Delhi - NIT issued earlier-on in regard to C band DTH 
Pitampura project cancelled and further the project envisaged for current year 
to float single tender for complete C band earth station chain system for DTH,  
Pitampura along with (1+1) HPA system for DDK, New Delhi. The Ministry 
also informed that most of the broadcast equipments are imported with no 
production in India and Make –in– India (MII) clause exemptions are to be 
taken for each project in regard to Broadcast Equipment and this procedure 
takes considerable time.  The Committee note that human resource shortage 
is also one of the reasons for the late completion of projects. However, they 
are managing the shortage with the help of Consultants. The Committee note 
that the Ministry has envisaged certain steps to improve performance during 
the year 2025-26. In view of the recurrent under-achievement of both physical 
and financial targets under BIND, the Committee recommend the Ministry to 
apprise of the action taken to (i)  Fully utilize the fund allocated for the 
financial year 2025-26; and  (ii) Tangible/quantifiable outcome of the initiatives 
taken to ac hieve targets under BIND; (iii) Action taken to align the financial 
progress with physical/performance targets;  (iv) Prepare a robust, proactive 
project tracking mechanism; (v) Increase the frequency of progress reviews 
and integrate scientific tools to forecast financial needs more accurately; (vi) 
Streamline the procurement process;  (vii) Formulate time bound targets for 
execution of projects; (viii) Establish contingency plan to mitigate project 
delays caused by technical or administrative failures.   Further with respect to 
distribution of DTH receive Set top boxes the Committee would like to be 
apprised of the decision taken for its distribution through DBT Scheme which 
was being deliberated last year; and (ix) Consider seeking blanket exemption 

3 
 
for Make –in–India (MII) clause with respect to importing broadcast 
equipments which are not produced in India”. 
 
6. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted that in order to fully utilize the fund s allocated for the financial year 2025 -26, 
various initiatives planned by the Ministry for timely utilization of funds are as follows:-  
• “Monitoring mechanism is strengthened and review of progress of projects 
is taken up periodically. 
• The forecast of the budget expenditure was done meticulously to arrive at 
the correct requirement of the budget. GFR provisions are followed for the 
expenditure incurred to ensure correct utilization of the budget. 
• Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has been reviewing the 
expenditure of Prasar  Bharati periodically and Prasar  Bharati has been 
advised to regularly review the projects through an annual action plan to 
be undertaken and monitored at least on a monthly basis both from 
physical and financial progress point of view. The progress of expenditure 
is also being monitored closely at the senior officer levels. 
• Prasar Bharati has adopted digital techniques in office functioning such as 
e-office, email, CAS (Centralized Accounting Software) and TSA (Treasury 
Single Account ) for fund release for the scheme. These have made the 
system fast, efficient and transparent.  
• A comprehensive content procurement policy has been approved by 
Prasar Bharati which clearly defines the processes and guidelines for 
procurement of content under different procurement models.  
• Further, multiple new policies have been approved by Prasar  Bharati 
Board (PBB) to streamline content procurements.   
• Policy Guidelines for Commissioning of Programmes under DAP (Direct 
Assignment Process) and an Online Portal has been launched for the 
same. 
• Policy Guidelines for acquisition of Licensed Ready -Made Audio -Visual 
Content and an Online Portal has been launched for the same. 
• Policy for Procurement of Feature Films for Prasar  Bharati Platforms on 
Fixed License Fee – 2021. 
• Procurement procedures have been streamlined. Project review meetings 
are held regularly at Zonal levels & HQ level and various activities involved 
in procurement of capital equipment and execution of works are critically 
assessed & targets are fixed.  
• The frequency of monitoring meetings has been increased at all levels of 
Directorate & Prasar Bharati Sectt.  
• Use of digital platform viz e -tendering, procurement through GEM, Video 
conference is also being utilized. 
A. In respect of  Tangible/quantifiable outcome of the initiatives taken to 
achieve targets under BIND, prepare a robust, proactive project 
tracking mechanism, increase the frequency of progress reviews and 
integrate scientific tools to forecast financial needs more accurately; 
An Apex Committee has been formed for monitoring the progress  of 
projects. Committee is meeting on periodical basis and encourage 
various project units to expedite the activities for timely completion of 
project. Committee discourses on each and every project of BIND 

4 
 
Scheme, stage-wise, right from inception of project to its completion 
(viz indent for project, Technical specs formulation & approval, 
Tendering, bids evaluation, supply of equipment and execution of 
project. During these meetings, Committee resolves various issues/ 
hindrance coming in implementation of project, such as obtaining 
necessary approvals (IFD, MII etc.) and timely completion of various 
stages (preparation of specs, floating of tenders, issue of purchase 
orders, supply of equipment installation etc.); and other concurrent 
issues.  
 
B. In respect of Streamline the procurement process, Formulate time 
bound targets for execution of projects, the following actions have been 
taken:- 
• Procurement procedures have been streamlined. Project review 
meetings are held regularly at Zonal level s & HQ level and 
various activities involved in procurement of capital equipment 
and execution of works are critically assessed & targets are fixed.  
• The frequency of monitoring meetings has been increased at all 
levels of Directorate & Prasar Bharati Sectt.  
 
C. In regard to Distribution of DTH receive Set top boxes, feasibility of 
distribution of said STB via DBT (Direct Benefit Transfer) mode is 
being carried out. Consultations with DBT Mission for registration of the 
scheme on DBT Bharat Portal and verification of Aadhar No & Bank 
details of Beneficiaries is in process. 
D. With respect to importing broadcast equipments which are not 
produced in India and blanket exemption for Make -in India, the 
followings are submitted:- 
• Ministry had received the request for blanket exemption for 
Make–in–India (MII) clause with respect to importing broadcast 
equipments which are not produced in India. 
• Such equipment are mainly manufactured by the Global 
companies.  The procurement of such equipment made in past 
years, wherein only items manufactured by the foreign 
manufacture were quoted by the firms.  During industry feedback 
of such equipments, no Indian manufactured items feedback is 
received. 
• Proposals seeking  exemption of Make in India (MII) clause for 
procurement of professional Broadcast Equipment have been 
received from time to time and necessary action has been taken 
in this regard”. 
 
 
7. The Committee (2024 -25), in their Eleventh Report, had noted recurrent 
under-achievement of both physical and financial targets under BIND  Scheme, 
and had, inter-alia, recommended the Ministry to apprise of the action taken for 
fully utilizing the fund s allocated for the financial year 2025 -26; for aligning the 
financial progress with physical/performance targets; about tangible/quantifiable 
outcome of the initiatives taken to achieve targets under BIND, etc. From the 
Action Taken Reply of the Ministry, it is learnt that review of progress of projects 
is taken up periodically , the monitoring mechanism is strengthened  and an Apex 

5 
 
Committee has been formed for monitoring the progress of projects. Besides, the 
procurement procedures have also been streamlined. Updating about the 
shortfalls in the physical targets, the Ministry  has informed that feasibility of 
distribution of 1.2 Lakh Set Top Boxes (STB) for LWE  (Left Wing Extremism) 
affected remote and tribal areas of the Country via Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) 
mode was being carried out. The Ministry  has also informed that with respect to 
importing broadcast equipment that are not produced in India, proposals seeking 
exemption of Make in India (MII) clause ha d been received from time to time and 
necessary action had been taken accordingly. In addition, they have also received 
the request for blanket exemption for Make –in–India (MII) clause . While taking 
cognizance of all the initiatives taken by the Ministry to align the f inancial 
progress with physical performance/targets, the Committee desire to be apprised 
of the following: - 
(i) Concrete outcome of the multiple  new policies approved by Prasar 
Bharati Board (PBB) to streamline content procurement; 
 
(ii) Tangible outcome after formation of Apex Committee for 
monitoring the progress of projects; 
 
(iii)  Outcome of the action taken to see the feasibility of distribution of 
STB (Set Top Boxes) via DBT (Direct Benefit Transfer) mode being 
carried out; and 
 
(iv) Action taken on the p roposals received, to seek blanket exemption 
of Make in India (MII) clause for procurement of professional 
Broadcast Equipment, and the outcome of the same. 
 
 
NORTH EASTERN REGION (NER) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
8. The Committee, in their Eleventh Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the budgetary allocations for the financial year 
2025-26, under 10% Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) for the North Eastern 
Region, has been earmarked at Rs. 111.85 crore. The budgetary allocations 
for NER during the FY 2024 -25 at BE and RE stage, were Rs. 100.45 crore 
and Rs. 98.40 crore , respectively. Whereas the actual expenditure till 31 st 
January, 2025 was Rs. 57.17 crore which was 58.10 % of RE allocations. 
Considering the fact that during the FY 2023 -24, the trend of fund utilization 
was 84.50% of RE allocations showed improvement from previous years, the 
Committee expect the same trend will be continued and the Ministry will 
overcome the hurdles under various Schemes and ensure full utilization 
during FYs 2024-25 and 2025-26. The Committee recommend the Ministry to 
strengthen the monitoring mechanisms so as to ensure that the physical 
targets implementation align with financial targets. Besides, to overcome the 
hurdles witnessed by the Ministry in NER, they may (i) Conduct more 
awareness programmes and seminars to highlight the benefits and financial 

6 
 
incentives for setting up Community Radio Stations; (ii) Take rigorous efforts 
to streamline procurement procedures and improve the efficiency of the 
equipment procurement process under BIND.  
Further, the Committee also note that against the sanctioned strength of 
4700 posts in DD and AIR of NER, there are 3089 vacancies (1338 in DD 
and 1751 in AIR). The Ministry also informed that there is shortage of Senior 
Officers and operational Staff in different streams of programming/  
technical/administration, shortage of faculty at Training Institute etc., due to 
lack of recruitment s and promotions. As an interim measure, the process for 
hiring of manpower for programme wing on contractual basis in the 
categories of Broadcast Executive, Post Production Assistant (Editing), Post 
Production Assistant (Graphics), Videographer and Set arranger is going on. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to pay 
immediate attention to the significant shortage of staff in All India Radio (AIR) 
and Doordarshan  Kendras (which has nearly 43.31% and 56.59% of 
positions vacant, respectively) by accelerating the recruitment process. The 
Committee may be kept apprised of the steps taken on all the 
recommendations made for improving financial and physical performance in 
NER along with their outcome”. 
9. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
(i) “Prasar Bharati Recruitment Board had been constituted for filling up 
vacancies for the posts in Akashvani and Doordarshan, having scale of 
pay less than that of the Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India, through 
Direct Recruitment/ Departmental Competitive Examination/ Deputation, 
as per the extant RRs. 
(ii) As of now, akin to NE region, there are several vacancies in Prasar  
Bharati. As already conveyed, to assess the optimal no. of posts in 
various streams and levels as per the current and future requirement, 
Prasar Bharati, has undertaken the exercise of HR 
Transformation through a manpower audit agency. Only on conclusion of 
this exercise, submission of its report and subsequent acceptance/ 
approval of the same by Prasar  Bharati/ Ministry of I&B, a clear picture 
regarding the quantum of recruitment to be made will emerge. Once this 
clarity emerges, steps for the recruitment process will be initiated, 
including recruitment for the vacancies in North Eastern Region. 
(iii) However, to tide over the acute manpower shortage, Prasar  Bharati is 
engaging professionals in various categories under Contractual 
Engagement Policy (CEP 2021) on short -term contracts to meet its 
urgent requirement of skilled and professional manpower. In this regard, 
in the NE Region, Technical Assistant /Jr. Technical Assistant have been 
provided. Out of 158 selected TA/JTS, 130 TA/JTS have already joined 
till date. 
As far as programme wing is concerned Doordarshan Directorate regularly 
interacts with Doordarshan Kendras. 
Zonal Review meets are also being held from time to time to monitor the 
programme production and transmission & various activities taken by 
Doordarshan Kendras. 
As far as expenditure on Content under BIND is concerned, the details for the 
FY 2024-25 and FY 2025-26 are as under: 
 

7 
 
Expenditure on Content under BIND for North -East Region in 2024-25( Rs. in 
Crore) 
S. No. Name of Kendra Total Expenditure 
1.  DDK Itanagar 3.18 
2.  DDK Imphal 2.50 
3.  PGF Gangtok 0.45 
4.  DDK Agartala 0.88 
5.  DDK Guwahati 2.35 
6.  DDK Shillong 0.65 
7.  DDK Aizawl 1.11 
8.  DDK Kohima 0.60 
9.  Content Sourcing Division 2.55 
 Total 14.27 
 % Utilisation (Total Funds 
Allocated : 14.34 Crores) 99.51 
 
Allocation for content creation in FY 2025-26 (Rs. in Crore) 
S. No. Name of Kendra  BE 2025-2026 
1.  DDK Itanagar 1.36 
2.  DDK Imphal 1.07 
3.  PGF Gangtok 0.19 
4.  DDK Agartala 0.37 
5.  DDK Guwahati  1.00 
6.  DDK Shillong 0.28 
7.  DDK Aizawl 0.47 
8.  DDK Kohima 0.26 
Total 5.00 
Doordarshan Kendras/Stations of the North -East Region has produced 
localized content under various genres by utilizing fund allocated under BIND 
like serials, reality shows, cuisine shows, travelogues, telefilms, 
documentaries, quiz programmes etc. by hiring local artists/talent. 
With regard to implementation of Projects an Apex committee has been 
formed for monitoring the progress of Doordarshan  projects throughout the 
country including NER. Committee is meeting on periodical basis and 
encourage various project units to expedite the activities for timely 
completion of project. Committee discourses on each and every project of 
BIND Scheme, stage-wise right from inception of project to its completion (viz 
indent for project, technical specifications formulat ion & approval, tendering, 
bids evaluation, supply of equipment and execution of project. During these 
meetings, Committee resolves various issues/ hindrance coming in 
implementation of project, such as obtaining necessary approvals (IFD, MII 
etc.)  and timely completion of various stages (preparation of specs, floating 
of tenders, issue of purchase orders, supply of equipment installation etc.); 
and other concurrent issues. 
Akashvani 
Fund utilization for Akashvani in NER under BIND, the updated status is as 
below:- 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
                  (Rs. in Crore) 
Sl.N. FY BE RE AE % of utilization of fund wrt. RE 
1 2024-25 5.77 3.97 3.92 98.74% 
2 2025-26* 0.25 ----  --- 
*Action is under progress. 
 
 
The quarterly expenditure plan for NER for FY 2025-26 is as follows: 
Object 
Head  
BE  
2025-26 
Quarterly Expenditure Plan 
Ist Quarter IInd Quarter IIIrd Quarter IVth Quarter Total 
DCDFC 36.3 9.075 9.075 9.075 9.075 36.3   
DCID 23.80 5.95 5.95 5.95 5.95 23.80 
CRS 21.54 5.20 5.40 5.40 5.54 21.54 
BIND 45.00 7.25 8.00 9.75 20.00 45 
DCDFC Achievements in NER for the year 2024-25 
i. Official Delegation of talented film -makers and fil m students from North 
East were sent to Busan and Berlin International Film Festivals. 
ii. A delegation of North East students from each State participated in 18th 
MIFF, 2024 and 55th IFFI, 2024. 
iii.  Financial assistance was provided to 7 Domestic Film Festivals.  
iv. Organization of Film Festivals in NE Region. 
v. Children in most remote parts of the NE States got to see meaningful 
children films through exhibition of children's films in schools. 
DCID Achievements in NER for the year 2024-25 
For implementation of DCID scheme in NE Region, 3 press tours and 8 
Vartalaps have been conducted during FY 2024-25. 
CRS Achievements in NER for the year 2024-25  
1. To support the Community Radio movement, there is a Central Sector 
Scheme (CSS) namely "Supporting Community Radio  Movement in India" is 
being implemented in all the States including North Eastern Region, in 
accordance with its mandate. Further, efforts of the Ministry have been to 
increase the number of Community Radio Stations in the region.  
2. In recent years, the Community Radio sector has witnessed steady and 
effective growth across India. This progress is notably reflected in the 
achievements of Community Radio Stations (CRSs) in the North -Eastern 
region during the Financial Year 2024–25.  
3. At present, 19 Community Radio Stations are operating in the North 
Eastern States, out of which the State of Manipur and Assam have 6 and 5 
Community Radio Stations respectively. The 500th CRS in the country set up 
in Aizwal, Mizoram was recently inaugurated by the Hon'ble Minis ter for I&B. 
The Ministry gave special emphasis on holding awareness workshops in 
order to increase penetration of CRS in NER and had conducted 2 community 
radio awareness workshops during the current FY 2024 -2025 covering 
Community radio dark districts as follows: 
          i) Itanagar-Arunachal Pradesh   
  ii) Aizawl-Mizoram   
4. During the last financial year, the Ministry received three applications for 
financial assistance from the North -Eastern States. Upon examination, the 
requisite documents for only two of these applications were found to be in 
order.  

9 
 
5. Realizing the potential of CRS in NER, certain amendments have been 
made in the Scheme to encourage the potential organisations to establish 
CRSs. Additional financial support will now be given to women -led 
organisations who want to set up Community Radio Stations in the NER. 
Further, to encourage use of green energy in CRS, additional financial 
assistance will be given. The amount of financial assistance provided to new 
CRS has been increased from earlier grant of Rs. 12 lakh to Rs. 18.20 - 24 
lakh towards infrastructure. 
Physical targets/achievements in NER for the financial year 2024 -25 has 
been given in Appendix -I & for the financial year 2025-26 has been given in 
Appendix –II, respectively 
Ministry should conduct more awareness programmes and seminars to 
highlight the benefits and financial incentives for setting up Community Radio 
Stations  
Reply: Ministry is taking proactive measures to increase the numbers of CRS 
in the NER s of India and accordingly workshops and conferences will be 
organized in this financial  year to increase awareness and highlighting the 
benefits of CRSs. It may note that Ministry has already increased the Grant 
from Rs 12 Lac to Rs 18.2 Lac for NER and in case GBM is having more 
than 50% of women will get of Rs 20.8 Lac and in case CRS install Solar 
Power setup then additional Rs 21 Lac will be reimbursed as financial 
assistance. Further, in case of any CRS located in NER is having 50% or 
more women in GBM and install solar power set  up then it can get a grant of 
Rs  24 Lac. It is to state that the demand of CRS is picking up very fast but 
many a times frequency spot is not available so the interested and eligible 
organizations are not able to get the permission. Ministry has received two 
cases of reimbursement of Grant cases so far in this year”. 
 
10. In their Eleventh Report (18 th LS), while noting less utilization of fund s 
allocated under 10% Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) for the North Eastern Region 
(NER) and 3089 vacancies in Doordarshan Kendras (DD) and All India Radio (AIR) 
in NER  against the sanctioned strength of 4799 posts , the Committee had 
recommended the Ministry to ensure full utilization  of funds during the financial 
years 2024 -25 and 2025 -26 and to pay immediate attention to the significant 
shortage of staff in AIR and DD Kendras of NER. The Committee note with 
satisfaction that the fund utilization for DD and Akashvani in NER under BIND  
scheme has reached almost full utilisations. The Ministry, in their Action Taken 
Reply, has informed that as of now, akin to NE region, there are several vacancies 
in Prasar Bharati and to assess the optimal number of posts as per the current and 
future requirement, Prasar Bharati  has undertaken the exercise of HR 
Transformation through a manpower audit agency. Only on conclusion of this 
exercise, submission of its Report and subsequent acceptance/ approval of the 
same by Prasar Bharati/Ministry of I&B, a clear picture regarding the  quantum of 
recruitment to be made would emerge. Once this clarity emerges, steps for the 

10 
 
recruitment process would be initiated, including recruitment for the vacancies in 
North Eastern Region. However, t he Ministry in their Action Taken Reply  has 
neither given details about the date of appointment nor about the target date for 
submission of Report by the Manpower Audit Agency. The Committee desire to be 
enlightened about the above details at the earliest. With respect to  Community 
Radio Centres (CRSs) in NER , the Ministry has informed that t o increase the  
numbers of CRS in NER, workshops and conferences would be organized during 
this financial year to increase awareness  among the common people . At present, 
19 Community Radio Stations are operating in the North Eastern States . O ut of 
these, 6 are in Manipur and 5 are in Assam and the 500th CRS in the Country was 
set up in Aizwal. The Ministry has also informed that the demand of CRS is gaining 
momentum but many times frequency spot is not available . As a result,  the 
interested and eligible organizations are not able to get the permission.  They had 
received two cases of reimbursement of Grant cases so far in this year.  The 
Committee are happy to note that realizing the potential of CRS in NER, certain 
amendments have been made in the Scheme to encourage the potential 
organisations to establish Community Radio Stations. Additional financial support 
would be given to women -led organisations who want to set up  CRSs in the NER. 
Further, the amount of financial assistance provided to new CRS has been 
increased from Rs. 12 lakh to Rs. 18.2 lakh . In case GBM is having more than 50% 
of women it will get Rs 20.8 Lac and in case CRS installs Solar Power setup then 
additional Rs 21 Lac will be reimbursed . Also to encourage use of green energy in 
CRS, additional financial assistance would be given. 
 
While appreciating the pace of fund utilization for DD and Akashvani in NER 
under BIND scheme, the Committee hope similar trend would be ensured for the 
quarterly expenditure plan for NER during the year 2025 -26. The Committee may 
be kept apprised of the achievement of the financial targets for the current 
financial year. With respect to vacancies in DD and AIR Kendras in North Eastern 
Region, the Committee urge the Ministry to expedite the entire exercise of HR 
Transformation, which is being done through a manpower audit agency, so that a 
clear picture regarding the  quantum of recruitment can emerge and steps for the 
recruitment process can be initiated for filling up the vacancies not only in DD  and 
AIR Kendras in North Eastern Region but also across Prasar Bharati. The 
Committee express their concern that the exercise of HR transformation and 
recruitment process in Prasar Bharati has considerably been delayed which is 

11 
 
affecting their performance Pan India. Further, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry may continue their efforts to support  CRS movement in the NER . The 
Committee may be kept apprised of the outcome of the HR Transformation  
exercise along with the initiatives taken to support and promote Community Radio 
Stations in North Eastern Region. 
 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI) BASED SOLUTIONS IN INFORMATION 
BROADCASTING SECTOR 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
11. The Committee, in their Original Report, has recommended that: –  
“The Committee note and appreciate that embracing the era of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI), on 26 th May, 2024, DD Kisan had introduced two AI news 
anchors, AI Krish and AI Bhoomi. These AI anchors can speak in fifty 
languages and are capable of delivering news 24X7 and are providing 
information to viewers about (a) Agricultural happening including research in 
the Country as well as at global level; (b) Trends in agriculture mandis 
(markets); (c) Weather related News; and (d) Information related to 
Government schemes. The Committee also note  that the Ministry has started 
“Samvad” - a dashboard which provides information on real -time basis and 
they are integrating AI tools in the translation module of DD or their web 
portal/social media. The Committee, while lauding the Ministry's efforts to 
integrate AI-based real -time translation tools for broadcasting and digital 
platforms across multiple languages, opine that the following areas may also 
be explored for integrating A I in functioning of MIB and apprise them of the 
outcome:  
(i) To explore partnerships with academic institutions and private  
sector A I companies to develop new AI applications in 
broadcasting.  
(ii) To monitor misinformation and disinformation trends and in 
identifying potential challenges;  
(iii) To integrate AI tools into content creation process ; 
(iv) To automate and integrate A I tools with services that require 
minimal human interference;  
(v) AI solutions for document management, predictive analysis in 
policy-making and optimizing administrative processes, etc; and  
(vi) To enhance the efficiency, accessibility, and engagement of 
Ministry’s information dissemination processes through A I driven 
innovation”. 
 
12. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Reply, 
submitted as under: -  
" AI -based content generation can greatly benefit DD News in several areas, 
including AI anchors for recorded programs, AI-generated voiceovers, 
automated identification of packages and sound bytes, and translation into 
multiple regional languages. These efforts  shall be enhanced through 
partnerships with academic institutions and Public -Private Partnerships 

12 
 
(PPP). Additionally, collaboration with young creative talents using  AI tools—
such as those showcased at the recent WAVES Summit — shall bring 
innovative ideas and energy to content development”. 
 
13. The Committee (2024-25), in their 11 th Report (18th LS), had appreciated the 
efforts of the Ministry  to integrate AI-based real -time translation tools for 
broadcasting and digital platforms across multiple languages . They had opined 
that certain other areas may also be explored for integrating AI in functioning of 
MIB which inter-alia included partnerships with academic institutions and private 
sector AI companies to develop new AI applications in Broadcasting ; to monitor 
misinformation and disinformation trends and in identifying potential challenges ; 
to integrate AI tools into content creation process ;  to enhance the efficiency, 
accessibility, and engagement of Ministry’s information dissemination processes 
through AI driven innovation ; etc. To this, the Ministry has informed that                
AI-based content generation can greatly benefit DD News in several areas, 
including AI anchors for recorded programs, AI-generated voice -overs, 
automated identification of packages and sound bytes, and translation into 
multiple regional languages. These efforts would be enhanced through 
partnerships with academic institutions and Public -Private Partnerships (PPP). 
Additionally, collaboration with young creative talents using AI tools—such as 
those showcased at the recent WAVES Summit — shall bring innovative ideas and 
energy to content development. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
concrete plan/roadmap of the Ministry, for  AI-integration and for harnessing 
benefits of AI in content creation, programming,  broadcasting,  etc. The 
Committee would also like to be kept apprised of the outcome of the efforts made 
for having partnerships with academic institutions , Public-Private Partnerships 
(PPPs)  and collaboration with young creative talents using AI tools which were 
showcased at the recent ly organised WAVES Summit.  To facilitate this the 
Committee also call upon Ministry to explore the possibility of appointing a Nodal 
AI officer solely responsible for all AI matters and coordination for other 
Ministries/Departments. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
BUDGET OVERVIEW AND DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) 
 
The Committee note that Demand No. 61 covers the expenditure of the Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) including its 7 media units/attached and 
subordinate offices, 2 autonomous bodies, 3 training institutes and 2 Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSUs).  For the Financial year (FY) 2025 -26, as against the proposed 
sum of Rs. 5588.01 crore, an amount of Rs. 4358.38 crore has been fixed for MIB at the 
BE stage. Out of this, Rs. 582.50 crore has been earmarked for the ‘Establishment 
Expenditure of the Centre’ against the proposed amount of Rs. 897.87 crore; Rs. 
1118.49 crore has been fixed for the ‘Central Sector Schemes’ against the proposed 
sum of Rs. 1917.49 crore; and Rs. 2657.39 crore is fixed for ‘Other Central Expenditure 
[including those on Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) and Autonomous Bodies] 
against the proposed sum of Rs. 2772.65 crore.  
 
The Committee note that during the FY 2024 -25, the BE and RE allocations for 
‘Establishment Expenditure of the Centre’  were Rs. 566.41 crore and Rs. 564.82 crore 
respectively, whereas the actual expenditure (till 30.01.2025) was Rs. 446.56 crore 
which is 79.06 % of RE allocations. For ‘Central Sector Schemes,’ the BE and RE for the 
FY 2024-25 were Rs. 1004.31 crore and Rs. 984.21 crore respectively, and the actual 
expenditure (till 30.01.2025), was Rs. 507.27 crore which is 51.54 % of RE allocations. 
For ‘Other Central Expenditure, ’ the BE and RE for the FY 2024 -25 were Rs. 2771.83 
crore and Rs.  3077.68 crore respectively, whereas the actual expenditure (till 
30.01.2025), was Rs. 2429.16 crore which is 78.93 % of RE allocations. The Committee 
note that the utilization percentage (w.r.t RE) for these three categories i.e. 
‘Establishment Expenditure of the Centre’, ‘Central Sector Schemes’, and ‘Other Central 
Expenditure', during the FY 2024 -25, were 79.06 %, 51.54 %, and 78.93 % of their RE 
allocations respectively. The Committee also note that during the FY 2024 -25, the BE 
allocation was Rs. 4342.55 crore which was increased to Rs. 4626.71 crore at RE stage.  
The Committee note that during the FY 2024 -25, though the actual expenditure till 30 th 
January, 2025 was Rs. 3382.99 crore, which is 73.12 % of RE allocation, few 
shortcomings in the physical targets (Upto 3 rd Quarter) were observed. The targets that 
fell short, inter-alia, included (i) ‘NIL’ targets achieved under BIND which were for (a) 
Strengthening of Border Area Coverage under continuing projects, (b) Expansion of 
reach of public service including in strategic area of National interest and (c) Digitization 
Modernization and expansion of Broadcast Infrastructure under Broadcast Infrastructure 
and Network Development Scheme; (ii) Under achievement of targets under 
Development Communication and Dissemination of Filmic Content which were for (a) 
Digitization of films and (b) Production of films and documentaries in various Indian 
languages; and (iii) Under achievement of targets under Supporting Community Radio 
Movement in India which were for (a) Organizing Community Radio awareness 
programmes and (b) Operational Community Radio Stations in the country.  
 
While noting that the utilisation trend for last 4 years has improved and more than 
90% of allocations made at RE stage has been utilized, the Committee hope that the 
Ministry will keep up their assurance of fully utilizing the funds allocated for the Financial 
Years 2024-25 and 2025-26. The Ministry may apprise of the updated status of the fund 

14 
 
utilized during the FYs 2024-25 and 2025-26 along with the status of the physical targets 
for the period. Further, the Committee also hope that the initiatives planned by the 
Ministry for timely utilization of funds during FY 2025 -26 would fructify and desire to be 
apprised of the outcome of their initiatives which include (i) Proper processing of related 
expenditure and thorough monitoring of physical activities and (ii) Regular meetings with 
the stakeholders, consistent monitoring and implementing the roadmap for utilization of 
the funds to achieve the physical targets. The Committee also recommend the Ministry 
to closely monitor the timely progress/implementation of the targets under DCDFC, 
BIND and CRS Schemes and ensure proper utilization of funds and keep the Committee 
apprised of the same. 
Reply of the Government 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
The overall allocation under Budget Estimates (BE) for the Financial Year (FY) 
2024-25 of Ministry of Information and Broadcasting is ₹ 4342.55 crore which was 
enhanced to Rs. 4626.71 crore at Revised Estimate (RE) 2024 -25 stage and further 
reduced to ₹ 4496.32 crore at Final Grant (FG) 2024 -25 stage. The overall utilization of 
funds against FG 2024 -25 as on 31.03.2025 is ₹ 4306.78 crore which is 95.78% of FG 
2024-25. 
The overall allocation under Budget Estimates (BE) for the Financial Year (FY) 2025 -26 
of Ministry of Information and Broadcasting is ₹ 4358.38 crore which is likely to be 
sufficient and will not affect the performance of the Ministry. Still there is a recourse to 
seek additional funds for any requirement at RE 2025-26 stage. 
 
Various Initiatives planned by the Ministry for timel y utilization of funds for 2025 -26 are 
as follows: 
● Monitoring mechanism is strengthened and review of progress of projects 
is taken up periodically. 
● The forecast of the budget expenditure was done meticulously to arrive at 
the correct requirement of th e budget. GFR provisions are followed for the expenditure 
incurred to ensure correct utilization of the budget. 
● Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has been reviewing the 
expenditure of Prasar Bharati periodically and Prasar Bharati has been advised  to 
regularly review the projects through an annual action plan to be undertaken and 
monitored at least on a monthly basis both from physical and financial progress point of 
view. The progress of expenditure is also being monitored closely at the senior officer 
levels. 
● Prasar Bharati has adopted digital techniques in office functioning such as 
e-office, email, CAS (Centralized Accounting Software) and TSA for fund release for the 
scheme. These have made the system fast, efficient and transparent.  
● A comprehensive con tent procurement policy has been approved by 
Prasar Bharati which clearly defines the processes and guidelines for procurement of 
content under different procurement models.  
● Further, multiple new policies have been approved by Prasar Bharati 
Board (PBB) to streamline content procurement as mentioned below:   
i. Policy Guidelines for Commissioning of Programmes under DAP (Direct 
Assignment Process) and an Online Portal has been launched for the same 
ii. Policy Guidelines for acquisition of Licensed Ready -Made Audio -Visual 
Content and an Online Portal has been launched for the same 
iii. Policy for Procurement of Feature Films for Prasar Bharati Platforms on 
Fixed License Fee – 2021. 

15 
 
• Procurement procedures have been streamlined. Project review meetings 
are held regularly at Zonal level & HQ level and various activities involved in 
procurement of capital equipment and execution of works are critically assessed & 
targets are fixed.  
• The frequency of monitoring meetings has been increased at all levels of 
Directorate & Prasar Bharati Sectt.  
• Use of digital platform viz e -tendering, procurement through GEM, Video 
conference is also being utilized. 
With regard to status of achievements of physical targets for 2024 -25in respect of four 
central sector schemes of the Ministry viz. DCID, DCDFC, BIND and CRS is placed at  
Annexure – A. So far as the targets for 2025 -26 is concerned, the same is reflected in 
Annexure- B. 
(File No. H-11013/9/2025-PC CELL dated 30.06.2025) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
BROADCASTING SECTOR (INCLUDING PRASAR BHARATI) 
 
BROADCASTING INFRASTRUCTURE AND NETWORK DEVELOPMENT (BIND) 
 
The Committee note that the Budgetary allocations for BIND Scheme, for the FY 
2025-26 (at BE stage) is Rs. 500.00 crore. During the FY 2024 -25, the BE and RE 
allocations were Rs. 500.00 crore and Rs. 400 crore respectively. However, the actual 
expenditure till 30 th January, 2025 was just Rs. 146.33 crore which is 36.58 % of RE 
allocations. The actual expenditure during the years  2022-23 and 2023-24 were 50.77% 
and 72.71% of RE allocations respectively. Reasons for under -utilisation, as furnished 
by the Ministry, inter-alia, include: (i) For distribution of 1.2 Lakh DTH Set Top Boxes for 
LWE remote & tribal areas of the Country, the financial Bids opened on 29.02.2024 and 
distribution of STBs through DBT scheme is being deliberated; (ii) The Ministry 
envisaged to float single tender for complete earth station at DTH Pitampura (C Band) - 
SITC of equipment’s (Compression and monitoring System equipment etc.); (ii) Certain 
administrative reasons halted the completion of TV tower at Amritsar, shifting of 
Transmitter and other associated equipments; (iii) Specification drafting is under process 
for setting up of Geo Diversity Centre for DD DTH platform similar to main site capacity; 
(iv)  For expansion of DD Free Dish Platform by SITC of additional two streams with RF 
System at Earth Station, Todapur, Delhi - NIT issued earlier-on in regard to C band DTH 
Pitampura project cancelled and further the project envisaged for current year to float 
single tender for complete C band earth station chain system for DTH, Pitampura along 
with (1+1) HPA system for  DDK, New Delhi. The Ministry also informed that most of the 
broadcast equipments are imported with no production in India and Make –in–India (MII) 
clause exemptions are to be taken for each project in regard to Broadcast Equipment 
and this procedure takes considerable time. The Committee note that human resource 
shortage is also one of the reasons for the late completion of projects. However, they 
are managing the shortage with the help of Consultants. The Committee note that the 
Ministry has envisaged certain steps to improve performance during the year 2025 -26. 
In view of the recurrent under -achievement of both physical and financial targets under 
BIND, the Committee recommend the Ministry to apprise of the action taken to (i) Fully 
utilize the fund allocated for the financial year 2025 -26; and (ii) Tangible/quantifiable 
outcome of the initiatives taken to achieve targets under BIND; (iii) Action taken to align 
the financial progress with physical/performance targets; (iv) Prepare a robust, proactive 
project tracking mechanism; (v) Increase the frequency of progress reviews and 
integrate scientific tools to forecast financial needs more accurately; (vi) Streamline the 
procurement process; (vii) Formulate time bound targets for execution of projects; (viii) 

16 
 
Establish contingency plan to mitigate project delays caused by technical or 
administrative failures. Further with respect to distribution of DTH receive Set top boxes 
the Committee would like to be apprised of the decision taken for its distribution through 
DBT Scheme which was being deliberated last year; and (ix) Consider seeking blanket 
exemption for Make –in–India (MII) clause with respect to importing broadcast 
equipments which are not produced in India. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
In order to fully utilize the fund allocated for the financial year 2025 -26the various 
Initiatives planned by the Ministry for timely utilization of funds are as follows:  
● Monitoring mechanism is strengthened and review of progress of projects is taken 
up periodically. 
● The forecast of the budget expenditure was done meticulously to arrive at the 
correct requirement of the budget. GFR provisions are followed for the 
expenditure incurred to ensure correct utilization of the budget. 
● Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has been reviewing the expenditure of 
Prasar Bharati periodically and Prasar Bharati has been advised to regularly 
review the projects through an annual action plan to be undertaken and 
monitored at least on a monthly basis both from physical and financial progress 
point of view. The progress of expenditure is also being monitored closely at the 
senior officer levels. 
● Prasar Bharati has adopted digital techniques in office functioning such as e -
office, email, CAS (Centralized Accounting Software) and TSA for fund release 
for the scheme. These have made the system fast, efficient and transparent.  
● A comprehensive content procurement policy has been approved by Prasar 
Bharati which clearly defines the processes and guidelines for procurement of 
content under different procurement models.  
● Further, multiple new policies have been approved by Prasar Bharati Board 
(PBB) to streamline content procurement as mentioned below:   
• Policy Guidelines for Commissioning of Programmes under DAP (Direct 
Assignment Process) and an Online Portal has been launched for the same. 
• Policy Guidelines for acquisition of Licensed Ready -Made Audio-Visual Content 
and an Online Portal has been launched for the same. 
• Policy for Procurement of Feature Films for Prasar Bharati Platforms on Fixed    
License Fee – 2021. 
• Procurement procedures have been streamlined. Project review meetings are 
held regularly at Zonal level & HQ level and various activities involved in 
procurement of capital equipment and execution of works are critically assessed 
& targets are fixed.  
• The frequency of monitoring meetings has been increased at all levels of 
Directorate &Prasar Bharati Sectt.  
• Use of digital platform viz e -tendering, procurement through GEM, Video 
conference is also being utilized. 

17 
 
 
A. In respect of Tangible/quantifiable outcome of the initiatives taken to achieve 
targets under BIND, prepare a robust, proactive project tracking mechanism, 
Increase the frequency of progress reviews and integrate scientific tools to 
forecast financial needs more accurately; 
“An Apex committee has been formed for monitoring the 
progress of projects. Committee is meeting on periodical basis and 
encourage various project units to expedite the activities for timely 
completion of project. Committee discourses on each and every project 
of BIND Scheme, stage wise right from inception of project to its 
completion (viz indent for project, Technical specs formulation & 
approval, Tendering, bids evaluation, supply of equipment and 
execution of project. During these meetings, committee resolves various 
issues/ hindrance coming in implementation of project, such as 
obtaining necessary approvals (IFD, MII etc.)  and timely completion of 
various stages (preparation of specs, floating of tenders, issue of 
purchase orders, supply of equipment installation etc.); and other 
concurrent issues.”  
B. In respect of Streamline the procurement process, formulate time bound 
targets for execution of projects, the following actions have been taken 
• Procurement procedures have been streamlined. Project review meetings are 
held regularly at Zonal level & HQ level and various activities involved in 
procurement of capital equipment and execution of works are critically assessed 
& targets are fixed.  
• The frequency of monitoring meetings has been increased at all levels of 
Directorate & Prasar Bharati Sectt.  
C. In regard to Distribution of DTH receive Set top boxes , feasibility of distribution of 
said STB via DBT (Direct Benefit Transfer) mode is being carried out. Consultations with 
DBT Mission for registration of the scheme on DBT Bharat Portal and verification of 
Aadhar No & Bank details of Beneficiaries is in process. 
D. With respect to importing broadcast equipments which are not produced in 
India and blanket exemption for Make-in India, the followings are submitted: 
• Ministry had received the request for blanket exemption for Make–in–India (MII) 
clause with respect to importing broadcast equipments which are not produced in 
India. 
• Such equipment are mainly manufactured by the Global companies. The 
procurement of such equipment made in past years, wherein only items 
manufactured by the foreign manufacture were quoted by the firms.  During industry 
feedback of such equipments, no Indian manufactured items feedback is received. 
• Proposals seeking exemption of Make in India (MII) clause for procurement of 
professional Broadcast Equipment have been received from time to time and 
necessary action has been taken in this regard. 
 
(File No. H-11013/9/2025-PC CELL dated 30.06.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 

18 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
DOORDARSHAN 
The Committee note that there are 35 satellite TV channels, of which 7 are All 
India channels and 28 are Regional/State channels and 29 channels are being telecast 
for 24x7. The Committee also note that out of Rs. 400 crore allocated to Prasar Bharati 
during RE stage for the year 2024 -25 (under BIND), an amount of Rs. 310.86 crore was 
allocated to Doordarshan against which an expenditure of Rs. 67.49 crore has been 
incurred till December, 2024. While observing that there were 8 States/UTs which did 
not have any separate Channels or even Limited Hours of telecast, the Ministry was 
asked whether any request have been received from those States/UTs for having 
separate channels or to increase the time for content related to their State/UT. 
Responding to this, the Ministry provided details which, inter-alia, include (a) PGF 
Gangtok has limited hour local cable and terrestrial transmission. It has dedicated 2  
hours window on DD Arunprabha channel, which is a satellite channel available over 
almost all over the Country; (b) PGF Portblair has limited hour terrestrial transmission; 
(c) Issues related to Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu (Daman)  are being covered 
by DD Girnar from time to time; (d) PGF Leh has limited hour terrestrial transmission. It 
has dedicated slots on DD Kashir channel, which is a satellite channel available over 
almost all over the Country; (e) Coverage issues related to Lakshadweep (Kavaratti) are 
being covered by DD Malayalam from time to time; (f) DD Haryana, a channel with 24x7 
operations is being beamed from DDK Chandigarh; (g) A dedicated channel is being 
operated by PGF Puducherry beamed from DDK Chennai on test transmission basis. 
The Committee further note that in the light of the stiff competition from private channels, 
the challenges being faced by Doordarshan in expanding their outreach include (a) Dual 
challenge of adhering to its public service mandate and competing with private 
broadcasters in a commercially viable manner; (b) In the expanded landscape where 
hundreds of channels and numerous OTT platforms, has unfortunately also given rise to 
content that often trivializes relationships, promotes vulgarity, and indulges in 
superstitions and sensationalism, being a destination for family -friendly and 
entertainment devoid of vulgarity while staying relevant in today’s rapidly evolving media 
landscape is both a challenge and an opportunity for Doordarshan.   
 
In view of the aforesaid, the Committee feel while providing vulgar free content for 
entertainment, Doordarshan can still continue to fulfill its public service mandate by 
remaining relevant in an increasingly competitive media environment and for this they 
may have to (i) Enhance its digital footprint - by boosting presence of Doordarshan 
content on social media, expanding content offerings on other digital platforms; (ii) 
Collaborate with influencers and social media creators to enhance reach among younger 
audience; (iii) Continue extensive coverage of cultural, social, and political events, but 
with modern presentation formats, appealing to younger demographics; (iv)  Increase 
localized programming; and (v) introduce AI -powered project management and to track 
project timelines to prevent delays. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to 
undertake periodic analysis of their initiatives taken to increase their viewership and 
apprise them of the outcome on all the initiatives taken. 
Reply of the Government 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
 Doordarshan is making continuous planning and effort to invigorate its 
programming landscape.  It is working upon several new, interesting and innovative 
programme concepts in times to come. These efforts include a range of initiatives aimed 

19 
 
at enriching the viewer experience and elevating the channels standing in the 
broadcasting arena:  
 They include, inter alia, 
1.  Keeping in mind Ease of Doing Business, Transparency, Accountability and 
Efficiency, Prasar Bharati has notified “Prasar Bharati Content Sourcing Policy 
2024” for sourcing of content from outside through various modes. 
2.  Revision of Rate Card for booking Artists and Casual Assignees. 
3. A number of fresh programmes such as Sardar – the game changer, Hum toh 
middle class hainji, Cyber Crime kiduniya … bach ke rehna, Kakbhusundi 
Ramayan, Fauji 2, Bhed Bharam… Rahasyon ka mayajaal, Jahan Chand Rehta 
hai, various musical reality shows/challenges namely Battle of Bands, Battle of 
Bands – International, Symphony of India, Wah Ustad have been introduced to 
attract viewers. 
4. Extensive OB Coverages: Doordarshan has undertaken a series of ambitious 
outside broadcasting (OB) initiatives, ranging from the live telecast of significant 
events such as the International Film Festival of Goa and the ISRO launches to 
immersive coverage of the Mahakumbh 2025 in Prayagraj. 
5. Production of programmes of various genres by the Development Communication 
Division (DCD) in collaboration with Ministries and various Government 
institutions and bodies. Recently Doordarshan has done projects for the Ministry 
of Home Affairs, Election Commission of India, Environment Ministry etc.. 
6. Programme “Krish Trish and Balti boy: Bharat Hain Hum” telecast by 
Doordarshan Network was mentioned by Hon’ble Prime Minister in his monthly 
programme “Mann Ki Baat”. It successfully completed the telecast of Season 01. 
Season 02 episodes are being telecast from 01st December 2024 onwards. 
7. Dooradrshan became a part of the AI revolution when DD KISAN became the first 
channel of the network with AI anchors- Krish & Bhoomi. 
8. On 19th   January 2024 DD Podhigai was relaunched as DD Tamil with new look 
and fresh programmes. Feature films are also introduced to garner viewership. 
9. DD Sports has been launched in HD. 
10. Feature Film Resumption: The practice of Hindi Feature Film telecast on DD 
National recommenced from 22nd April 2023 after a break of a few years.   
Introduction of feature films gave the desired result and there was a marked 
increase in the viewership. Later, weekend Hindi Feature Films in evening prime 
time were also introduced. Telecast of feature films are also being started in a few 
regional channels. 
11. In-house Serial Production: Attention has been given to in -house serial 
productions at Regional channel level. This encouragement led DDK Jalandhar, 
DDK Ahmedabad and DDK Mumbai to produce in-house serials. 
12. Doordarshan Network has 66 Programme Production Centers across the country 
with Studio set -up and 28 regional/state channels. Localised content are being 
created by regional/state centres by hiring local artists/talent and telecast on their 
respective regional/state channels. 
13. Doordarshan has also focused on enhancing its digital footprints and presence in 
the social media space.  
(i) Recently Prasar Bharati has launched its own OTT platform “WAVES” and 
various channels of Doordarshan are integrated into the WAVES. 
 
Doordarshan has made wide presence on Social  Media such as YouTube, 
Facebook, Twitter,  Instagram etc.  The DD National and DD News YouTube channels 
have a subscriber base of over 6 million and 5.6 million subscribers, respectively. 

20 
 
With respect to the observation that there were 8 states which did not have any 
separate channels or even limited hour of telecast, the reply is submitted as 
below:  
Among the UTs, UT of J&K has a dedicated satellite channel, PGF Srivijayapuram/Port 
Blair (Andaman & Nicobar Island), PGF Leh (Ladakh) has limited hour local terrestrial 
transmission and a dedicated satellite channel is being operated by PGF Puducherry 
(Puducherry) beamed from DDK Chennai on test transmission basis. PGF Leh has 
dedicated timeslots on Satellite Channel DD Kashir. 
(i) Doordarshan Network has a dedicated satellite channel for every state of India 
except Sikkim. Further it is submitted that PGF Gangtok (Sikkim) has limited hour 
local cable and terrestrial transmission and dedicated timeslots on satellite 
channel DD Arunprabha. 
 
With regard to stiff competition from private channels, the challenges being faced 
by Doordarshan. It is submitted that: 
Revenue earned from DD Free Dish DTH is decreasing compared to last FY. Reasons 
may be attributed to popularity of OTT in areas where high speed internet is easily 
available. The Cost of broadband is also decreasing in urban areas. However, to tackle 
the competition with respect to OTT platforms, Prasar Bharati has launched its OTT 
platform ‘WAVES’ which will also provide video on demand, free -to-play gaming, radio 
streaming, live TV streaming, 65 live channels, several in -app integrations for video and 
gaming content, and online shopping through Open Network for Digital Commerce 
(ONDC) supported Government’s e-commerce platform. 
(File No. H-11013/9/2025-PC CELL dated 30.06.2025) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
INFORMATION SECTOR  
 
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU (PIB) 
The Committee note that the Press Information Bureau (PIB) is the nodal agency 
of the Government of India to disseminate information through print, electronic and 
social media on Government policies, programmes, initiatives and achievements. It 
functions as an interface between the Government and the media and also provides 
feedback to the Government on people’s reaction as reflected in the media. It also 
advises the Government on communication strategies best suited to meet the needs of 
the media. The Ministry has informed that the entire network of the Press Information 
Bureau has been revamped and they have integrated dashboard 'Samvad' which is a 
major software tool for their Information Wing. Through 'Samvad' they send alerts to 
every Ministry and conduct trend analysis of media -related information. Along with this, 
they also monitor activities on social media and electronic channels and trends or alerts 
are identified, collected and communicated to the relevant Ministry. The Ministry has 
also informed that as per allocation to PIB, a reduction of Rs 9.41 crore has been made 
in the establishment expenditure in RE 2024-25 when compared to BE 2024-25 and this 
has impacted the non -salary head (revenue section), thereby affecting the clearance of 
bills and committed liabilities resulting in a backlog of pending bills. In light of the above, 
the Committee recommend the Ministry to present their case to Ministry of Finance and 
seek adequate grant in future. The Committee also recommend: 

21 
 
(ii) PIB should expedite filling up vacant posts for which funds were allocated 
as it will improve overall operational efficiency and will not render surrendering 
of funds; 
 
(ii) Regular audits of fund utilization, media outreach, and communication 
outcomes will ensure transparency and improve resource allocation efficiency; 
 
(iii) The ongoing integration and expansion of ‘SAMVAD’ (Systematic Analysis 
of Media Views for Decision -making) should be supported by adequate 
financial and technical resources to ensure comprehensive and timely 
analysis across all forms of Media. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
The vacant post of IIS/CSS/CSSS/CSCS Cadres are filled by the Ministry of I&B 
(through DoP&T in case of CSS/CSSS Cadres). Further, the posts of CSOL (Central 
Secretariat Official Language) Cadre are filled by the MHA. In this regard, necessary 
action has been taken.  
Recruitment to the post of MTS and Ex -cadre posts of PIB Hqrs is carried out by PIB 
Hqrs. During 2024, a total of 32 vacancies were reported vis -à-vis 35 dossiers have 
been received for pre appointment formalities, which is under process.  
Regarding, ex-cadre posts of Regional/Branch offices of this Bureau, various steps have 
already been initiated such as periodical reporting of the same to the concerned office of 
Staff Selection Commission (SSC), timely conduction of DPC meetings, revision of the 
outdated RRs (Recruitment Rules), etc., to fill up such vacancies. 
 
Regular audits of fund utilization, media outreach, and communication outcomes 
will ensure transparency and improve resource allocation efficiency; 
 
Media Outreach Programme and publicity for special events (MOP), a sub scheme of 
DCID Scheme, is implemented by PIB through its regional/ Units across the country. 
Accordingly, funds are allocated to respective regional offices/ Units.  
To ensure transparency and improve resource allocation, regular audits have been 
conducted in respect of these offices. Further, physical targets are monitored by PIB 
Hqrs. through Output Outcome Monitoring Framework on quarterly/ monthly basis to 
achieve greater media outreach and optimum utilization of funds 
The ongoing integration and expansion of 'SAMVAD' (Systematic Analysis of 
Media Views for Decision-making) should be supported by adequate financial and 
technical resources to ensure comprehensive and timely analysis across all forms 
of Media. 
The objective of Integrated Dashboard SAMVAD is to bring together feedback from print, 
electronic, online and social media towards major government initiatives, decisions, 
policies, programmes so as to enable the government to come up with effective policy 
formulation, mid-course corrections implementation and communications. 
Technical Resources and Platform Enhancement 
The contract for Design, Development and Maintenance of Integrated Dashboard 2.0 
(SAMVAD) has been awarded to a vendor Through GeM portal. The expected 
expenditure for this engagement is approximately Rs. 6 crore during FY 2025 -26. This 
envisages expansion of SAMVAD to also cover social media & TV feedback. 

22 
 
Financial Resources 
The expenditure pertaining to SAMVAD 2.0 is to be met from the budgetary allocation 
under the sub -scheme “Social Media Platform” under the umbrella scheme 
‘Development Communication & Information Dissemination (DCID)’ of the M/o 
Information & Broadcasting. 
During FY 2025 -26, funds of Rs.8.63 crores have been allocated to New Media Wing 
under the object head “Professional Services” of the sub -scheme “Social Media 
Platform”. However, as NMW has a committed liability of Rs.12.50 crores towards 
expenditure related to social media activities, dues of BECIL and the development of an 
AI & ML based multilingual translation and voice localization platform, there is 
requirement of additional funds to the tune of Rs.10.00 crores to meet the expenditure 
relating to SAMVAD for its uninterrupted execution and related initiatives. 
The aforesaid additional requirement of funds is under consideration of the Ministry and 
is likely to be taken up during RE 2025-26 stage. 
(File No. H-11013/9/2025-PC CELL dated 30.06.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
PRESS REGISTRAR GENERAL OF INDIA (PRGI) [ERSTWHILE REGISTRAR OF 
NEWSPAPERS FOR INDIA (RNI)] 
 
 
The Committee note that the office of Registrar of Newspapers (RNI) for India has been 
renamed as Press Registrar General of India (PRGI) with the enactment of the ‘Press 
and Registration of Periodicals Act, 2023’ (PRP) on  1st March, 2024. The Committee 
also note a new digital platform – ‘Press Sewa Portal’ (https://presssewa.prgi.gov.in/) 
has been launched on 22 nd February, 2024. The Committee observe that the main 
features of Press Sewa Portal when fully developed would include (a) Online Application 
System; (b) Parallel processing facility for application at Specified Authority in the States 
and PRGI; (c) User -friendly interface with e -sign facility; (d) Digital payment gateway 
integrated through Bharat Kosh; (e) Real-time status updates via SMS and email; (f) QR 
code-based digital certificate; (g) Better access to information for publishers; (h) Profile 
creation and management for owners, publishers, and printers; (i) Chat bot -based 
grievance resolution mechanism; (k) Deficiency communication with a 30 -day response 
window; (l) Faster, efficient, and transparent processing of applications.   
 
With respect to pending registration, the Ministry informed that till 30th September, 
2024, they had cleared 13,000 physical applications. They have also submitted that 
some new issues or problems had come up with the online application like District 
Magistrates (DMs) of some States are not yet the specified authority. Thereby, whatever 
applications reached them were not processed and hence the Ministry are writing to 
Chief Secretaries and mailing to DMs to take action on the pending applications with 
them. Further responding to a query whether there is a provision in new Act if the 
applications are not approved within the specified period of time, the Ministry informed 
positively and stated that in the new Act, if the Specified Authority (SA), whether District 
Magistrate or Commissioner does not approve the application within 60 days it will be 
automatically accepted and come back to the Ministry. They have also submitted that 
when the applications come back to them, they doubt about the background checks and 
that is why they refer those cases again so as to avoid any problem later on. The 
Ministry also informed that these challenges are witnessed in the initial phases and they 
are in discussion with several Chief Secretaries where applications have come back 
automatically. They are even taking actions proactively to address all the challenges 

23 
 
witnessed. The Committee also note that apart from issue involved in processing and 
clearance of applications for registration, there are other challenges associated with 
circulation (like fake circulation) and advertisements dependent on circulation, etc. The 
Ministry has informed that PRGI is in the process of simplifying the Standard Operating 
Procedure (specially the list of documents to be submitted/uploaded by the publisher) 
and an amended Standard Operating Procedure ( SOP) or guideline will be issued by 
PRGI in this regard. With respect to c oncerns associated with Circulation Verification 
through Desk Audit, the Ministry also informed that the PRP Act, 2023 provides for a 
new methodology for Circulation Verification (CV) of Newspapers through a desk study 
approach wherein physical verification of printing press, distribution centres etc. are only 
a rarity and the processing is to be done electronically. In view of the issues concerning 
registration and circulation of periodicals/Newspapers and implementation of PRP Act, 
2023, t he Committee desire for action taken on the following 
Observations/Recommendations: 
(i) The amended SOP or guideline for circulation verification may be issued at 
the earliest; 
(ii) The Ministry may address the concerns regarding on -boarding of Specified  
Authorities (SAs) from the State(s) (District Magistrates) on Press Sewa Portal 
so that they can access the application and provide their comments within 60 
days; 
(iii) To ensure that the remaining 27 States/UTs notifies the ‘PRP Act, 2023’ at the  
earliest; 
(iv) To implement atomization as envisaged under PRP Act at the earliest and  
keep the Committee apprised of in this regard; 
(v) Provide updated information (issue -wise) about action taken on all the issues 
related to allotment of titles and registration of periodicals and circulation of 
the same. 
Reply of the Government  
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
The amended Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for circulation verification 
through desk audit has been issued by the Office of the Press Registrar General of India 
and is now available on the official PRGI website for public access w ith respect to  
01.04.2025. 
ii)  As per Press & Registration of Periodicals Act, 2023 (PRP Act, 2023), the comments 
of Specified Authorities (District Magistrates) on Press Sewa Portal are required for 
processing the applications for registration of newspapers/periodicals. Accordingly, the 
Specified Authorities of 777 Districts have been on -boarded on Press Sewa Portal. 
These Specified Authorities have been given the Login Credentials on their official email 
for processing the applications submitted by publishers on Press Sewa Portal 
(Username and Password) as per the provisions of PRP Act, 2023. 
iii) In this regard, DO letters have been issued to Chief Secretaries dated 09.01.2024 
and 19.08.2024 from the M/oI&B and DO letters have also been issued to Chief 
Secretaries dated 25.10.2024 and 24.04.2024 for notifying the Act and on -boarding of 
Specified Authorities on the Press Sewa portal. 
iv) In addition, it has been conveyed that the District Magistrate will deem to be the 
Specified Authority for processing of applications even if the PRP Act is not notified in 
the State. By virtue of this Central Act, all District Magistrates will, by default, have been 
declared Specified Authorities for processing the applications for registration of 
periodicals on Press Sewa Portal. Therefore, the non -notification of the Act is not 
affecting the processing in a big way. 

24 
 
The Following modules/Services are fully functional in Press Sewa Portal: 
Registration of Periodicals (New and Revised) 
Filing of Annual Statement 
Online Payment of Penalty 
Authentication of Self-declaration for Newsprint Import 
Processing of Applications by Specified Authority. 
Ownership Transfer of periodicals 
Regularity of periodicals/Submission of copies of periodicals 
Ceasing of Registration 
The Following modules are under development: 
Circulation Verification 
Application for Facsimile Edition 
Suspension/Cancellation of Registration. 
v) The Office of the Press Registrar General of India (PRGI) has issued 212 Certificates 
of Registration and 164 Certificate of Revised Registration for periodicals through Press 
Sewa Portal till 14.05.2025.  
(File No. H-11013/9/2025-PC CELL dated 30.06.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
NORTH EASTERN REGION (NER) 
The Committee note that the budgetary allocations for the financial year 2025 -26, 
under 10% Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) for the North Eastern Region, has been 
earmarked at Rs. 111.85 crore. The budgetary allocations for NER during the FY 2024 -
25 at BE and RE stage, were Rs. 100.45 crore and  Rs. 98.40 crore respectively. 
Whereas the actual expenditure till 31 st January, 2025 was Rs. 57.17 crore which was 
58.10 % of RE allocations. Considering the fact that during the FY 2023 -24, the trend of 
fund utilization was 84.50% of RE allocations showed improvement from previous years, 
the Committee expect the same trend will be continued and the Ministry will overcome 
the hurdles under various Schemes and ensure full utilization during FYs 2024 -25 and 
2025-26. The Committee recommend the Ministry to strengthen the monitoring 
mechanisms so as to ensure that the physical targets implementation align with financial 
targets. Besides, to overcome the hurdles witnessed by the Ministry in NER, they may (i) 
Conduct more awareness programmes and seminars to highlight the benefits and 
financial incentives for setting up Community Radio Stations; (ii) Take rigorous efforts to 
streamline procurement procedures and improve the efficiency of the equipment 
procurement process under BIND.  
 
Further, the Committee also note that against the sanctioned strength of 4700 
posts in DD and AIR of NER, there are 3089 vacancies (1338 in DD and 1751 in AIR). 
The Ministry also informed that there is shortage of Senior Officers and operational Staff 
in different streams of programming/technical/administration, shortage of faculty at 
Training Institute etc., due to lack of recruitment and promotions .As an interim measure, 
the process for hiring of manpower for programme wing on contractual basis in the 
categories of Broadcast Executive, Post Production Assistant (Editing), Post Production 
Assistant (Graphics), Videographer and Set arranger is going on. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to pay immediate attention to the significant 
shortage of staff in All India Radio (AIR) and Doordarshan Kendras (which has nearly 
43.31% and 56.59% of positions vacant, respectively) by accelerating the recruitment 
process. The Committee may be kept apprised of the steps taken on all the 
recommendations made for improving financial and physical performance in NER along 
with their outcome. 
 

25 
 
Reply of the Government 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:–  
(i) Prasar Bharati Recruitment Board had been constituted for filling up vacancies for the 
posts in Akashvani and Doordarshan, having scale of pay less than that of the Joint 
Secretary to the Govt. of India, through Direct Recruitment/ Departmental Competitive 
Examination/ Deputation, as per the extant RRs. 
(ii)  As of now, akin to NE region, there are several vacancies in Prasar  Bharati. As 
already conveyed, to assess the optimal no. of posts in various streams and levels as 
per the current and future requirement, Prasar  Bharati, has undertaken the exercise of 
HR Transformation  through a manpower audit agency. Only on conclusion of this 
exercise, submission of its report and subsequent acceptance/ approval of the same by 
Prasar Bharati/ Ministry of I&B, a clear picture regarding the  quantum of recruitment to 
be made will emerge. Once this clarity emerges, steps for the recruitment process will 
be initiated, including recruitment for the vacancies in North Eastern Region. 
(iii)  However, to tide over the acute manpower shortage, Prasar  Bharati is engaging 
professionals in various categories under Contractual Engagement Policy (CEP 2021) 
on short -term contracts to meet its urgent requirement of skilled and professional 
manpower. In this regard, in the NE Region, Technical Assistant /Jr. Technical Assistant 
have been provided. Out of 158 selected TA/JTS, 130 TA/JTS have already joined till 
date. 
As far as programme wing is concerned Doordarshan Directorate regularly interacts with 
Doordarshan Kendras. 
Zonal Review meets are also being held time to time to monitor the programme 
production and transmission & various activities taken by Doordashan Kendras. 
As far as expenditure on Content under BIND is concerned, the details for the FY 2024 -
25 and FY 2025-26 are as under : 
Expenditure on Content under BIND for North-East Region in 2024-25 (Rs. in 
Crore) 
S.No. Name of Kendra Total Expenditure 
1.  DDK Itanagar 3.18 
2.  DDK Imphal 2.50 
3.  PGF Gangtok 0.45 
4.  DDK Agartala 0.88 
5.  DDK Guwahati 2.35 
6.  DDK Shillong 0.65 
7.  DDK Aizawl 1.11 
8.  DDK Kohima 0.60 
9.  Content Sourcing Division 2.55 
 Total 14.27 
 % Utilisation (Total Funds Allocated: 14.34 
Crores) 99.51 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
Allocation for content creation in FY 2025-26 (Rs. in Crore) 
S.No. Name of Kendra  BE 2025-2026 
1. DDK Itanagar 1.36 
2. DDK Imphal 1.07 
3. PGF Gangtok 0.19 
4. DDK Agartala 0.37 
5. DDK Guwahati  1.00 
6. DDK Shillong 0.28 
7. DDK Aizawl 0.47 
8. DDK Kohima 0.26 
Total 5.00 
 
1. Doordarshan Kendras/Stations of the North -East region has produced localized 
content under various genres by utilizing fund allocated under BIND like serials, 
reality shows, cuisine shows, travelogues, telefilms, documentaries, quiz 
programmes etc. by hiring local artists/talent. 
 With regard to implementation of Projects an Apex committee has been formed for 
monitoring the progress of Doordarshan projects throughout the country including NER. 
Committee is meeting on periodical basis and encourage various project units to 
expedite the activities for timely completion of project. Committee discourses on each 
and every project of BIND Scheme, stage wise right from inception of project to its 
completion (viz indent for project, technical specifications formulation & approval, 
tendering, bids evaluation, supply of equipment and execution of project. During these 
meetings, committee resolves various issues/ hindrance coming in implementation of 
project, such as obtaining necessary approvals (IFD, MII etc.)  and timely completion of 
various stages (preparation of specs, floating of tenders, issue of purchase orders, 
supply of equipment installation etc.); and other concurrent issues. 
 
Akashvani 
Fund utilization for Akashvani in NER under BIND, the updated status is as below: 
                     (Amount in Crore) 
S.N. FY BE RE AE % of utilization of 
fund wrt. RE 
1 2024-25 5.77 3.97 3.92 98.74% 
2 2025-26* 0.25 ----  --- 
*Action is under progress. 
 
 
 

27 
 
The quarterly expenditure plan for NER for 2025-26 is as follows: 
Object 
Head  
BE  
2025-26 
Quarterly Expenditure Plan 
Ist 
Quarter 
IInd 
Quarter 
IIIrd 
Quarter 
IVth 
Quarter Total 
DCDFC 36.3 9.075 9.075 9.075 9.075 36.3 
       
       
DCID 23.80 5.95 5.95 5.95 5.95 23.80 
CRS 21.54 5.20 5.40 5.40 5.54 21.54 
       
BIND 45.00 7.25 8.00 9.75 20.00 45 
      
 
 DCDFC Achievements in NER for the year 2024-25 
i. Official Delegation of talented filmmakers and film students from North East were 
sent to Busan and Berlin International Film Festivals. 
ii. A delegation of North East students from each state participated in 18th MIFF, 
2024 and 55th IFFI, 2024. 
iii.  Financial assistance was provided to 7 Domestic Film Festivals for 
iv. Organization of Film Festivals in NE Region. 
v. Children in most remote parts of the NE States got to see meaningful children  
films through exhibition of children's films in schools. 
DCID Achievements in NER for the year 2024-25 
For implementation of DCID scheme in NE Region, 3 press tours and 8 Vartalaps has 
been conducted during FY 2024-25. 
CRS Achievements in NER for the year 2024-25  
1. To support the Community Radio movement, there is a Central Sector Scheme 
(CSS) namely "Supporting Community Radio Movement in India" is being implemented 
in all the States including North Eastern Region, in accordance with its mandate. 
Further, efforts of the Ministry have been to increase the number of Community Radio 
Stations in the region. 2. In recent years, the Community Radio sector has witnessed 
steady and effective growth across India. This progress is notably reflected in the 
achievements of Community Radio Stations (CRSs) in the North -Eastern region during 
the Financial Year 2024–25.  
2. At present, 19 Community Radio Stations are operating in the North Eastern States, 
out of which the State of Manipur and Assam have 6 and 5 Community Radio Stations 
respectively. The 500th CRS in the country set up in Aizwal, Mizoram was recently 
inaugurated by the Hon'ble Minister for I&B. The Ministry gave special emphasis on 
holding awareness workshops in order to increase penetration of CRS in NER and had 
conducted 2 community radio awareness workshops during the current FY 2024 -2025 
covering Community radio dark districts as follows: 
 

28 
 
            i) Itanagar-Arunachal Pradesh   
           ii) Aizawl-Mizoram   
 
3. During the last financial year, the Ministry received three applications for financial 
assistance from the North -Eastern States. Upon examination, the requisite documents 
for only two of these applications were found to be in order.  
4. Realizing the potential of CRS in NER, certain amendments have been made in the 
Scheme to encourage the potential organisations to establish CRSs. Additional 
financial support will now be given to women -led organisations who want to set up 
Community Radio Stations in the NER. Further, to encourage use of green energy in 
CRS, additional financial assistance will be given. The amount of financial assistance 
provided to new CRS has been increased from earlier grant of Rs. 12 lakh to Rs. 
18.20- 24 lakh towards infrastructure. 
Physical targets/ achievements in NER for the year 2024-25 is given in ANNEXURE- E 
& for the year 2025-26 is given in ANNEXURE-F respectively. 
Ministry should conduct more awareness programmes and seminars to highlight 
the benefits and financial incentives for setting up Community Radio Stations  
“Ministry is taking proactive measures to increase the numbers of 
CRS in the NER regions of India and accordingly workshops and 
conferences will be organized in this financial year to increase 
awareness and highlighting the benefits of CRSs. It may note that 
ministry has already increased the Grant from from  Rs 12 Lac to Rs 
18.2 Lac for NER and in case GBM is having more than 50% of women 
will get of Rs 20.8 Lac and in case CRS install Solar Power setup then 
additional Rs 21 Lac will be reimbursed as financial assistance. Further, 
in case of any CRS located in NER is having 50% or more women in 
GBM and install solar power setup than it can get a grant of Rs 24 Lac. 
It is to state that the demand of CRS is picking very fast but many times 
frequency spot is not available so the interested and eligible 
organizations are not able to get the permission. Ministry has received 
two cases of reimbursement of Grant cases so far in this year.” 
 
(File No. H-11013/9/2025-PC CELL dated 30.06.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI) BASED SOLUTIONS IN INFORMATION 
BROADCASTING SECTOR  
 
The Committee note and appreciate that embracing the era of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI), on 26 th May, 2024, DD Kisan had introduced two AI news anchors, AI 
Krish and AI Bhoomi. These AI anchors can speak in fifty languages and are capable of 
delivering news 24X7 and are providing information to viewers about (a) Agricultural 
happening including research in the Country as well as at global level; (b) Trends in 
agriculture mandis (markets); (c) Weather related News; and (d) Information related to 
Government schemes. The Committee also note that the Ministry has started ‘Samvad’ - 
a dashboard which provides information on real -time basis and they are integrating AI 
tools in the translation module of DD or their web portal/social media. The Committee, 

29 
 
while lauding the Ministry's efforts to integrate AI -based real -time translation tools for 
broadcasting and digital platforms across multiple languages, opine that the following 
areas may also be explored for integrating AI in functioning of MIB and apprise them of 
the outcome: 
(i) To explore partnerships with academic institutions and private-sector AI 
companies to develop new AI applications in broadcasting. 
(ii) To monitor misinformation and disinformation trends and in identifying 
potential challenges;  
(iii) To integrate AI tools into content creation process;  
(iv)  To automate and integrate AI tools with services that require minimal 
human interference;  
(v) AI solutions for document management, predictive analysis in policy -
making and optimizing administrative processes, etc; and 
(vi) To enhance the efficiency, accessibility, and engagement of Ministry’s 
information dissemination processes through AI-driven innovation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:–  
 
 AI-based content generation can greatly benefit DD News in several areas, 
including AI anchors for recorded programs, AI -generated voiceovers, automated 
identification of packages and sound  bytes, and translation into multiple regional 
languages. These efforts  shall be enhanced through partnerships with academic 
institutions and Public-Private Partnerships (PPP). Additionally, collaboration with young 
creative talents using AI tools —such as those showcased at the recent WAVES 
Summit— shall bring innovative ideas and energy to content development. 
 
                                                     (File No. H-11013/9/2025-PC CELL dated 30.06.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
BROADCASTING SERVICES (REGULATION) BILL 
 
The Committee note that with the advent of new technologies and platforms, 
various categories of broadcasting services emerged such as internet -based services 
like IPTV, OTT platforms etc., and also existing technologies like DTH and cable 
television underwent substantial changes. The Ministry have been amending relevant 
laws and Rules made thereunder from time to time to keep pace with technological 
changes. Likewise, they had prepared the draft Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill 
which sought to replace the existing Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995. 
The Ministry informed that the said Bill intends to streamline the regulatory processes; 
extend its purview to cover the Over -the-Top (OTT) content and digital news; introduce 
contemporary definitions and provisions for emerging technologies and seeks to 
strengthen the self -regulatory regime through Broadcast Advisory Council for content 
regulation; etc. The Bill also sought to improve the existing laws governing broadcasting 
service.  The Committee also understand that the draft Broadcasting Services 
(Regulation) Bill was placed in the public domain on 10.11.2023 seeking 
views/comments/suggestions from the general public and stakeholders till 09.12.2023 
which was later extended upto 15.01.2024.  Based on the wide range of views 

30 
 
expressed during consultations with stakeholders, additional time was provided for 
comments till 15.10.2024. Now the Ministry has informed that they do not intend to 
introduce the bill in the current session.  
 
Given the pace of technological advancements, the Committee appreciate the 
objectives and the intent behind the Broadcasting Bill and recommend that (a) A 
comprehensive review of the feedback received during consultations should be done; (b) 
Key suggestions from stakeholders be incorporated; (c) To ensure that the Bill is holistic, 
robust and technology proof.  (d) The Ministry may also incorporate a provision in the Bill 
for periodic reviews and updates as this will ensure that the legislation remains relevant 
with emerging technologies and trends in the Broadcasting Sector. Now that the Ministry 
is intending to bring Broadcasting Bill, they may as well bring a comprehensive Media 
Bill which addresses the concerns related to Broadcasting, Cable TV, OTT platforms etc. 
If need be, the Ministry may also look into the feasibility for:  
(i) Constituting a Media Council involving various forms of Media like Print, 
Broadcasting, Digital, etc. under one umbrella for better coordination 
and implementation of laws governing them. While doing so the inputs 
from related Ministry/Organisations like Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology may also be sought; 
 
(ii)  Consider bringing the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology, Department of Telecommunications and Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting under one umbrella for better 
coordination for issues emerging due to convergence of technologies. 
 
Reply of the Government  
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:–  
S. 
No. 
Recommendation Comments 
a. A comprehensive review of the 
feedback received during 
consultations should be done. 
 
 
 
 
  
(a)The Broadcasting Services 
(Regulation) Bill was placed in public 
domain with an explanatory note on 
10.11.2023 seeking views/ comments/ 
suggestions from the general public and 
stakeholders till 09.12.2023 which was 
later extended upto 15.01.2024. 
  
(b) Consultations with stakeholders 
were held on 18.04.2024, 29.05.2024, 
14.06.2024 and 09.07.2024 and 
comments were sought from them upto 
10.08.2024. 
  
(c) Based on the wide range of views 
expressed during consultation with 
stakeholders, additional time was 
provided for comments till 15.01.2024. 
  
  
(d) The Ministry does not intend to 
introduce the Bill in the parliament, 
b. Key suggestions from the 
stakeholders be incorporated. 
 
 
 
  
c. To ensure that the Bill is holistic, 
robust and technology proof. 
 
 
 
  
d. The Ministry may also incorporate 
a provision in the Bill for periodic 

31 
 
reviews and updated as this will 
ensure that the legislation remains 
relevant with emerging 
technologies and trends in the 
Broadcasting sector. Now that the 
Ministry is intending to bring 
Broadcasting Bill, they may as well 
bring a comprehensive Media Bill 
which addresses the concerns 
related to Broadcasting, Cable TV, 
OTT platforms etc. If need be, the 
Ministry may also look into the 
feasibility for: 
  
(i) Constituting a Media Council 
involving various forms of Media 
like Print, Broadcasting, Digital, 
etc. under one umbrella for better 
coordination and implementation 
of laws governing them. While 
doing so the inputs from related 
Ministry/ Organizations like 
Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology may also 
be sought; 
 
(ii) Consider bringing the Ministry 
of Electronics and Information 
Technology, Department of 
Telecommunications and Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting 
under one umbrella for better 
coordination for issues emerging 
due to convergence of 
technologies. 
presently. 
                                         
 (File No. H-11013/9/2025-PC CELL dated 30.06.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
ISSUES RELATED TO RULE/CODE OF ETHICS  
The Committee note that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting is 
concerned with the Films and Audio -Visual programmes/content made available by 
online content providers/publishers. The Committee note that on a related issue, there is 
a song glorifying alcohol, liquor, wine, drugs and violence that may impact/affect children 
adversely, directions were issued by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, vide order 
dated 22-07-2019 to ban/take action against the culprits. 
Further, the Committee note that there exist guidelines w ith respect to  songs glorifying 
alcohol, liquor, wine, drugs and violence that may impact/affect children adversely 
which, inter-alia, include (A) Part -Il of the Schedule prescribed under the IT Rules, 2021 
provides - Psychotropic substances, liquor, smoking and tobacco: Films or serials, etc., 
that as a whole portray misuse of psychotropic substances, liquor, smoking and tobacco 

32 
 
would qualify for a higher category of classification; (B) As per Guidelines 2(v) and (vi) 
issued under Section 5B(2) of the Cinematograph Act 1952, scenes which have the 
effect of justifying or glorifying drinking and scenes tending to encourage, justify or 
glamorise drug addiction are not shown; (C) As per the Programme Code under the 
Cable Television Network Rules, 1994, no film or film song or film promo or film trailer or 
music video or music albums or their promos, whether produced in India or abroad, shall 
be carried through cable service unless it has been certified by the Central Board of Film 
Certification (CBFC) as suitable for unrestricted public exhibition in India. The Ministry 
also informed that as per the directives of the Hon'ble High Court of Punjab and 
Haryana, the Central Board of Film Certification ensures that songs glorifying alcohol, 
liquor, wine, drugs, and violence are not approved for public exhibition. The Committee 
note that irrespective of the classification, clips of films or songs that are used for 
promotion and songs are played live or on digital platforms. In light of the fact that 
songs/clips glorifying alcohol, liquor, wine, drugs and violence 'can have significant 
impact on the minds of vulnerable children especially the youth, the Committee would 
like to be apprised of the steps take on the following recommendations: 
i. Formulate a policy/framework to strengthen the existing Guidelines and  ensure 
that the guidelines issued by the Court are complied with while bring any such 
policy on this issue;  
ii. The Committee, while drawing analogy from the aforesaid verdict of the Court of 
Punjab and Haryana, recommend the Ministry to ensure stronger code of ethics 
that mitigates the glorification of harmful substances in the media, thereby 
protecting vulnerable audiences, particularly children and young adults; 85  
iii. Ensure that the advisory issued by the Ministry on 26.11.2024 related to 
streaming content on narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances should be 
periodically reviewed and updated to keep up with evolving trends in content 
creation; 
iv. Apprise about the details of the said advisory issued on 26.11.2024 for OTT 
Platforms on streaming content related to narcotic drugs and Psychotropic 
Substances; 
v. Coordinate with State Governments and law enforcement ensure these orders 
are being implemented effectively; to 
vi. Give wide publicity to the existing Rules and guidelines so that the public is aware 
of their rights to report content that violates the Code of Ethics;  
vii. Engage with stakeholders in the music, film, and entertainment industries to 
create awareness about the harmful impact of glorifying 3alcohol, drugs, violence, 
vulgarity, obscenity or depravity, and to promote responsible and socially -
conscious content.  
Reply of the Government  
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:–  
Reply 15(i)& (ii):  
The Government of India has notified the Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media, Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 on 25.02.2021. This Rule 
provide for a Code of Ethics for the Digital News Publishers and publishers of OTT 
platforms, and a three-level institutional mechanism for redressal of grievances relating to 
violation of the Code of Ethics.  
These Rules provide for a Code of Ethics for publishers of online curated content (OTT 
platforms) which, inter alia, require the publishers not to transmit any content which is 

33 
 
prohibited by law for the time being in force and to undertake age -based classification of 
content into 5 categories, based on general guidelines provided in the Schedule to the 
Rules. 
 
The Schedule prescribed under the IT Rules, 2021 inter -alia provides for the following 
sets of guidelines  for Classification of any curated content namely ‘Context’, ‘Theme’ 
and ‘Tone and impact’. 
Context: Curated content may be considered in the light of the period depicted in such 
content and the contemporary standards of the country and the people to which such 
content relates. Therefore, the context in which an issue is presented within a film or 
video may be given consideration. Factors such as the setting of a work (historical, 
fantasy, realistic, contemporary etc.), the manner of presentation of the content, the 
apparent intention of the content, the original production date of the content, and any 
special merits of the work may influence the classification decision. 
Theme: Classification decisions may take into the theme of any content but will depend 
significantly on the treatment of that theme, especially the sensitivity of its presentation. 
The most challenging themes (for example, drug misuse, violence, pedophilia, sex, 
racial or communal hatred or violence etc.) are unlikely to be appropriate at the junior 
levels of classification. 
 
Tone and impact:  Curated content may be judged in its entirety from the point of view 
of its overall impact. The tone of content can be an  important factor in deciding the 
influence it may have on various groups of people. Thus, films/serials that have a 
stronger depiction of violence may receive a higher classification. 
 
Part-II of the Schedule prescribed under the IT Rules, 2021 provides for the Issue 
Related Guidelines.  
(a) Psychotropic substances,  liquor, smoking and tobacco: Films or serials, etc. 
that as a whole portray misuse of psychotropic substances, liquor, smoking and 
tobacco would qualify for a higher category of classification. 
(b) Imitable behaviour- Portrayal of potentially dangerous behaviour that are likely 
to incite the commission of any offence (including suicide, and infliction of self -
harm) and that children and young people may potentially copy, shall receive a 
higher classification. 
(c) Violence- Classification decisions shall take account of the degree and nature of 
violence in a work. 
Reply 15(iii) & (iv): 
 
This Ministry has issued advisory date 26.11.2024 for OTT Platforms on Streaming 
Content Related to Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances.  
The Code of Ethics for OTT platforms as provided under the Rules provides that a 
publisher shall not transmit or publish or exhibit any content which is prohibited under any 
law for the time being in force or has been prohibited by any court of competent 
jurisdiction. The general guidelines for classification of content provides as under: 
(a) Curated content may be considered in the light of the contemporary standards 
of the country and the people to which such content relates.  
(b) Classification decisions may take into the theme of any content but will depend 
significantly on the treatment of that theme, especially the sensitivity of its presentation. 

34 
 
The most challenging themes, including drug misuse, are unlikely to be appropriate at the 
junior levels of classification.  
(c) Curated content may be judged in its entirety from the point of view of its 
overall impact. The tone of content can be an important factor in deciding the influence it 
may have on various groups of people.  
(d)The classification of any content may also depend upon the target audience of 
the work, and the impact of the work on such audience. 
Further, the issue specific guidelines for classification of content include the following 
considerations in respect of classification of content:  Psychotropic substances, liquor, 
smoking and tobacco: Films or serials, etc. that as a whole portray misuse of 
psychotropic substances, liquor, smoking and tobacco would qualify for a higher category 
of classification.  
Table behavior: Portrayal of potentially dangerous behavior that are likely to incite the 
commission of any offence, including infliction of self -harm, and that children and young 
people may potentially copy, shall receive a higher classification. 
 
Reply (v) to (vii):  
 
This Ministry time to time engages with stakeholder to discuss various issues relating to 
the publishers of OTT platforms and Digital News Publishers.   
 
(File No. H-11013/9/2025-PC CELL dated 30.06.2025) 
 
*****

35 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS   WHICH THE  COMMITTEE  DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN  VIEW  OF THE  REPLIES  OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
-NIL- 

36 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS      IN RESPECT OF  WHICH    REPLIES   OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE   NOT BEEN   ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
-NIL- 

37 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES   
OF THE  GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
INTERNAL AND EXTRA BUDGETARY RESOURCES (IEBR), REVENUE 
GENERATED AND UTILIZED 
 
The Committee note that the revenue projection of Prasar Bharati, for the 
Financial year 2025-26, is Rs. 2205.00 crore which is based on the income sources like 
(a) Commercial, (b) Platforms (PB Resources and DTH), (c) Digital Operations, (d) 
Miscellaneous Income and (e) interest on term deposits. During the FY 2024 -25, the 
revenue projection and revenue generated by Prasar Bharati were Rs. 2205.00 crore 
and Rs. 1216.81 crore (upto November, 2024) respectively and the Net expenditure has 
been Rs. 991.59 crore. In FY 2023-24, the revenue projection and revenue generated by 
Prasar Bharati were Rs. 1700.00 crore and Rs. 1996.56 crore respectively and the Net 
expenditure has been Rs. 1356.89 crore (provisional). The Committee note that Prasar 
Bharati generated excess revenue of approximately Rs. 640.00 crore during the FY 
2023-24 over its operational expenditure and the same is being utilized for improving the 
content of Akashvani and Doordarshan and launch of OTT.  The Committee express 
satisfaction at the level of self -sufficiency achieved by Prasar Bharati, with respect to 
IEBR, during the last few years and appreciate that Prasar Bharati is meeting its 
operational expenses from its IEBR and has some surplus too. The Committee, while 
lauding the efforts of Prasar Bharati to generate revenue under IEBR, call upon the 
Ministry to continue their unstinted efforts in future too. Further, while noting that excess 
revenue is being utilized for improving the content, the Committee recommend the 
Ministry to not only focus on improving the quality of content to broaden the viewership 
base of national and international viewers but also look into the feasibility of (i) Setting 
up a dedicated unit to drive revenue generation through content on both traditional and 
emerging platforms; (ii) Create a robust monitoring framework to evaluate the financial 
performance of new initiatives for content generation; (iii) Define clear Key Performance 
Indicators (KPIs) related to viewership, subscription rates, advertising revenue, etc., so 
as to ensure that the new initiatives and new OTT platforms of Prasar Bharati contribute 
positively to its financial sustainability.  
 
The Committee observe that so far no study has been conducted to assess the 
assets under Doordarshan Kendras in India. Nevertheless, Prasar Bharati Board has 
approved a draft monetization plan including feasibility study of land assets (both 
Akashvani & Doordarshan). They intend to monetize land assets on PPP model without 
alienating the land and the revenue so generated will be used by Prasar Bharati for 
making it sustainable. The Committee recommend the Ministry to prioritize the 
completion of the feasibility study in a time -bound manner to identify and categorize idle 
assets across Doordarshan Kendras and All India Radio (Akashvani) units and apprise 
them of the timeline and framework for the same. While undertaking the feasibility study 
of land assets, the Ministry may ascertain whether any part of its land/property is under 
encroachment or under any court case. The Committee would like to know whether any 
Doordarshan/Akashvani or any of its other undertaking/organization is functioning from 
rental building. Details of the above study may be submitted before the Committee at the 
earliest. The Committee may also be kept apprised of all the steps taken to enhance the 
effectiveness of IEBR utilization, generate more revenue from underutilized assets and 
boost Prasar Bharati’s long-term financial sustainability. 
 

38 
 
Reply of the Government  
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:–  
With respect to feasibility study of land assets, the following is submitted: 
Prasar Bharati is in the process of conducting pre -feasibility study for monetization of 
Prasar Bharati land assets. For this purpose, NIT (Limited Tender) for setting up of PMU 
for pre-feasibility Study work of Prasar  Bharati Assets was published for National Land 
Monetization Corporation (NLMC) empanelled consultants for carrying out pre -feasibility 
of identified underutilized Prasar Bharati land assets based on Industry feedback.  
In this regard, bid has been received on 09.06.2025 which is being evaluated.  All efforts 
are being made and planned to carry out the pre -feasibility in time bound manner to 
identify and categorize idle assets. As per NIT, the delivery/assessment period is one 
year from the date of award of work order to the successful bidder. 
Subsequent to pre-feasibility study, the feasibility study will be conducted after which the 
framework to monetize the Prasar Bharati Land Assets will be finalised. 
The list of offices which are functioning in rented buildings is at Annexure – C. 
The ongoing land/property court cases in respect of Prasar Bharati is at   
Annexure –D. 
In regard to Creating a robust monitoring framework to evaluate the financial 
performance of new initiatives, the following is submitted:  
It is the constant endeavor of Doordarshan to complete the projects within the specified 
time frame. Monitoring mechanism has been strengthened considerably. Various stages 
involved in payments like demand & release of LOC for capital equipments and 
execution of works are strengthened and streamlined for faster processing. The 
frequency of monitoring expenditure has been increased at all levels of Directorate and 
Spending offices. Use of digital platform viz e -office, Video conference is also being 
utilized. 
In addition to above, an APEX committee has been constituted by Prasar  Bharati 
Secretariat to monitor the progress of BIND scheme. 
With respect to enhance the effectiveness of IEBR utilization the following is 
submitted: 
Revenue earned from DD Free Dish DTH is decreasing compared to last FY. Reasons 
may be attributed to popularity of OTT in areas where high speed internet is easily 
available. The cost of broadband is also decreasing in urban areas.  However, to tackle 
the competition with respect to OTT platforms, Prasar Bharati has launched its own OTT 
platform ‘WAVES’ which will also provide video on demand, free -to-play gaming, radio 
streaming, live TV streaming, 65 live channels, several in -app integrations for video and 
gaming content, and online shopping through Open Network for Digital Commerce 
(ONDC) supported Government’s e-commerce platform. 
(File No. H-11013/9/2025-PC CELL dated 30.06.2025) 
 
 

39 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES (CSS) 
 
The Committee note that after rationalization of Central Sector Schemes of 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting there are four Central Sector Schemes (CSS) 
viz. Development Communication & Information Dissemination (DCID), Development 
Communication & Dissemination of Filmic Content (DCDFC), Broadcasting 
Infrastructure & Network Development (BIND) and Supporting Community Radio 
Stations in India (CRS). During the FY 2024 -25, the allocations for ‘Central Sector 
Schemes’ at BE and RE stage were Rs. 1004.31 crore and Rs. 984.21 crore 
respectively. The overall actual expenditure till 30 th January, 2025 is Rs. 507.27 crore 
which is 51.54% of RE. Bifurcation of actual expenditure under all the four ‘Central 
Sector Schemes’ [DCID, DCDFC, BIND and Supporting Community Radio Stations 
(CRS) in India are Rs. 121.10 crore, Rs. 236.01 crore, Rs. 146.33 crore and Rs. 3.83 
crore respectively. This reflects that they were 71.45%, 59.00%, 36.58% and 26.02% of 
RE allocations respectively. The Committee note that under two ‘Central Sector 
Schemes’ [DCID and DCDFC], the trend of utilization of funds during the last few years 
have been satisfactory. However, under BIND and Community Radio Stations (CRS), 
the situation is not the same and there have been very low utilization of funds during this 
period. Even with respect to achieving physical targets under the Central Sector 
Schemes like BIND, DCDFC and CRS, it has been observed that for some indicators the 
targets could not be achieved. For example only One out of Seven FM Transmitters is 
installed and the work progress is ‘NIL’ for indicators like (i) Five  5KW Mobile FM 
transmitters to be installed at J&K and LOC Border; (ii) 7.5 Lakh DTH Set Top 
Boxes(STBs) to be procured for Remote, Tribal and LWE areas; (iii) 14 Satellite Uplink 
Stations to be upgraded/added (including Earth Stations, DSNG Units & DTH Earth 
Stations); (iv) 16 new production set -up to be upgraded/added (including Studios, News 
Units & OB Vans); (v) 11 existing Production/Transmission Centers to be 
upgraded/migrated; etc. Even though during the FY 2023 -24, while the actual 
expenditure under ‘Central Sector Schemes’ was Rs. 1037.02 crore which was 100.95 
% of RE allocations, yet there were shortfalls with respect to targets set under 
‘Digitization for Conservation of Films and capacity building’; ‘Restoration of Films’; 
‘Digitization Modernization and expansion of Broadcast Infrastructure’; etc. Plausible 
reasons for non -utilization of allotted funds, shortfalls in achieving set targets and 
improper monitoring of projects may be submitted before the Committee. 
 
The reasons adduced by the Ministry for less expenditure under BIND include (i) 
Decision to float single tender for complete earth station at DTH Pitampura (ii) Certain 
administrative reasons that halted completion of TV tower at Amritsar; (iii) Specification 
drafting is under process for setting up of Geo Diversity Centre for DD DTH platform 
similar to main site capacity; (iv)  For expansion of DD Free Dish Platform by SITC of 
additional two streams with RF System at Earth Station Todapur Delhi - NIT issued 
earlier in regard to C band DTH Pitampura project cancelled etc. Under DCDFC, the 
World Audio-Visual & Entertainment Summit (WAVES 2025) was originally scheduled to 
be held in the Financial Year 2024 -25, however, it is now scheduled to be held 
during the year 2025 -26. Under CRS, the Ministry informed that Financial Assistance - 
Grant in Aid is a demand driven subsidy and in the current Financial Year, so far no 
demand has been received for financial assistance in North East region which resulted 
in less expenditure. In the light of these facts, the Committee, at the cost of sounding 
repetitive, opine that even after more than 3 years of rationalization of Schemes, under -
achievement of both physical and financial targets w.r.t two of the four Central Sector 
Schemes reflects lackadaisical and ineffective implementation of rationalization. The 
Committee, therefore, call upon the Ministry to avoid such lag in the targets by 

40 
 
addressing the recurrent hindrances impacting the Implementation ‘Central Sector 
Schemes’. The Committee also urge the Ministry to ensure proper utilisation of funds for 
meeting the physical targets under all the Central Sector Schemes, during the financial 
year 2025 -26 by gearing up their mechanism for implementation and achieving the 
physical targets as per defined timelines. The Committee may be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard. The Ministry may also provide tangible/quantifiable outcome of the 
steps taken by them on the following so as to reflect the effectiveness of the measures: 
 
i. Monitoring mechanism has been strengthened considerably;  
 
ii. Procurement procedures have been streamlined. Project review 
meetings are held regularly at Zonal level & HQ level and various 
activities involved in procurement of capital equipment and execution of 
works are critically assessed & targets are fixed; 
 
iii. The frequency of monitoring meetings has been increased at all levels 
of Directorate & Prasar Bharati Secretariat;  
 
iv. Use of digital platform viz e-office, e -tendering, procurement through 
GEM, Video conference is also being utilized; 
 
v. An apex committee has been constituted by Prasar Bharati Secretariat 
to monitor the progress of scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:–  
Under BIND Scheme, out of 7 FM Transmitters planned the status of 6 transmitters 
which was not achieved is given below: 
  
S. 
No. 
FM 
Transmitter 
Project/Power 
Status 
 
1. Namsai 
1 kW FM 
➢ Transmitter and its accessories including DG sets has 
been received at site and installation work is in 
progress. 
➢ Towerwork and departmental works are in progress.  
2. Rampur 
10 kW FM 
➢ DSETC of 100 Mtr tower completed. 
➢ Power supply work -Tender action initiated for 
procurement equipment 
➢ Departmental work- Under Progress. 
➢ Transmitter is under procurement, delayed due to 
cancellation of order. 
3. Jaspur 
10 kW FM 
➢ Building works completed 
➢ Foundation work completed & erection of tower under 
progress (48Mtr completed) 
➢ DW, equipment tender action to be initiated 
➢ Earth filling at tower area CCW - pending due to laying 
of Tower Material 
➢ New Electricity connection - applied. 
➢ Transmitter is under procurement, delayed due to 
cancellation of order. 

41 
 
4. Dahod 
10 kW FM 
➢ The land offered  by State Government has 
been acquired and  foundation stone was also laid by 
Hon'ble Prime Minister on 27.09.2023. Soil testing has 
been done. 
➢ Estimate for  land development, leveling, construction 
of building and approach road has been sanctioned on 
30.01.2025.  
➢ The tender process for construction of building, 
erection of 100  meter steel lattice self - supported 
tower has been initiated. 
➢ Transmitter is under procurement, delayed due to 
cancellation of order. 
5. Gurez 
10 kW FM 
Due to extreme weather conditions, the project is delayed.  
➢ Building works CCW- Completed 
➢ Departmental works being sanctioned. 
➢ Tender for DG Set is in progress 
➢ Structural Analysis of exiting Tower-work order issued 
➢ Transmitter is under procurement, delayed due to 
cancellation of order. 
➢ Power supply equipment under process. 
6. Kupwara 
10 kW FM 
➢ Building works by CCW- Completed  
➢ Departmental works completed 
➢ Power supply works completed  
➢ Tender for DG Set is in progress 
➢ Structural Analysis of exiting Tower-work order issued 
➢ Transmitter is under procurement, delayed due to 
cancellation of order. 
 
i. Supply of 5 kW digital compatible;  
Supply orders for Transmitter and associated equipment placed. Transmitters are due 
for pre dispatch inspection.  Frequency authorization and WPC License for import of 
transmitter is awaited.  
ii. Five 5 kW Mobile FM transmitters for installation at J&K and LOC Border;      
5 kW Mobile transmitters: Supply orders for Transmitter and associated equipment 
placed. Transmitters are due for pre dispatch inspection. Frequency authorization and 
WPC License for import of transmitter is awaited. 
Work of integration of transmitter in mobile containers and foldable mast is initiated. 
Indent has been submitted to Procurement Division for taking up tendering process. 
 
iii. For expansion of DD Free Dish Platform by SITC of additional two streams with 
RF System at Earth Station Todapur Delhi - NIT issued earlier in regard to C band 
DTH Pitampura project cancelled. 
‘Most of the major broadcast equipment are imported with 
almost no production in the country. Suppliers of these products are 
also limited. As such procurement & SITC of such projects takes time 
on account of Market analysis, receipt of budgetary quote on the 
indent from prospective bidders and technical specification 
formulation as per Doordarshan requirement after continuous 
deliberation with prospective bidders. 

42 
 
During last year of BIND scheme 2021 -26, such time -
consuming works on most of the major SITC projects viz Earth 
station upgradation, OB van projects etc. have already been initiated. 
Now these projects are expected to be completed in current financial 
year. Further, to overcome any other hindrance coming in completion 
of project, Apex committee will continuously monitor the progress of 
project and resolve these issues.’ 
 
With regard to tangible/quantifiable outcome of the steps taken to reflect the 
effectiveness of the measures, the following is submitted: 
 
‘An Apex committee  has been formed for monitoring the 
progress of projects. Committee is meeting on periodical basis and 
encourage various project units to expedite the activities for timely 
completion of project. Committee discourses on each and every 
project of BIND Scheme, stage wise right from inception of project to 
its completion (viz indent for project, Technical specs formulation & 
approval, Tendering, bids evaluation, supply of equipment and 
execution of project. During these meetings, committee resolves 
various issues/ hindrance coming in implementation of project, such 
as obtaining necessary approvals (IFD, MII etc.)  and timely 
completion of various stages (preparation of specs, floating of 
tenders, issue of purchase orders, supply of equipment installation 
etc.); and other concurrent issues. 
 
Supply order with respect to various projects were issued after 
streamlining/ resolving the procurement issues by the Apex 
committee with different wing of procurement/design.’ 
 
Further it is submitted that: 
Multiple attempts were made for tender procurement of 1,20,000 DTH sets for 
distribution in tribal, remote and LWE areas. Technical evaluation of tenders received 
towards procurement of 1.2 Lakh DTH Receive sets (Non -CAS) + 7.5 Lakh DTH receive 
sets envisaged to be procured under Project mode has been completed and presently 
financial concurrence is under consideration 
i. Part payment (10% /20%) for Analog Transmitter (ATs)  UHD Modular Flypack OB 
Units (32 cameras), SITC of 4 Cameras MCUs (Multi Camera Units) and some 
others is remaining which will be completed in current FY. 
ii. Funds for Amritsar Tower could not be utilized due to ongoing court case. 
iii.  Delivery of SITC of Native UHD Multiformat Mobile rod. Facilities (OB Van) of 8 
camera scheduled in FY 2024-25 extended to 2025-26. 
 
With regard to ensuring proper utilisation of funds for meeting the physical targets 
under all the Central Sector Schemes, during the financial year 2025 -26, the inputs 
have been provided in para no. 1.  
 
With regard to shortfall in the targets on digitization, capacity building, 
restoration of films the following may kindly be seen. 
 
 ‘Digitization of Films’ -As part of the Digitization project, 
4,30,000 minutes are being digitized using advanced technologies, 
including ARRI -XT scanners for picture and Sondor scanners for 
audio. The process involves scanning of film reels at 2K/4K, followed 
by color grading, adding of subtitles and DCP and reference copy 

43 
 
creation. To date, NFDC -NFAI has scanned approximately 4 lakh 
minutes of footage (around 6,441 titles), with several allied processes 
such as color grading, subtitle addition, and more progressing 
concurrently. The scanning rate was low primarily due to the 
deteriorated condition of archival reels, slower scanning speeds 
required for higher resolutions, an increased number of rescans, 
additional time needed for quality checking of damaged reels, and 
high retrieval times for DPX files from LTO tapes. As a result of these 
factors, the estimated scanning speed could not be achieved, and 
the targeted number of titles could not be digitized in FY 2023–24.’ 
 
‘Capacity Builiding, Restoration of Films’:  Restoration project of 2,00,000 minutes 
(approx. 2253 titles) under NFHM with a budget of INR 363 crores commenced in March 
2023, following the completion of site preparation and inspections. The titles have been 
shortlisted by forming language wise committees consisting of filmmakers, documentary 
filmmakers, film historians, producers etc. The process involves removal of defects in the 
digitized film such as scratches, color mismatch, missing frames etc., DCP mastering, 
adding of subtitles, and creation of restored and reference copy files. Till date, NFDC -
NFAI has restored more than 1 lakh minutes (approx. 1104 titles). Due to the 
deteriorated condition of the reels —marked by scratches, color fading, dirt, dust, and 
other forms of damage—and the stringent quality standards required, additional time was 
necessary to ensure the best possible outcomes. As a result, the targeted number of 
titles could not be restored in FY 2023–24. 
i) Further, it is submitted that Ministry is consistently monitoring the expenditure and 
progress of each activity under the NFHM project to ensure timely completion 
of all tasks. To enhance implementation efficiency and optimize expenditure, 
the Ministry has adopted several measures, including regular reviews and 
close monitoring of both financial and physical progress. Quarterly and 
monthly performance reviews are conducted during meetings chaired by the 
Secretary (I&B) with the Senior Officers of the Ministry. In addition to this, the 
concerned Joint Secretary continuously oversees the implementation of the 
NFHM. Various midcourse corrections are suggested to ensure full utilization 
of allocated resources. 
Reasons for the shortfall in achieving targets for the production of films and 
documentaries in Various Indian languages. FY 2024-25:-  
Sr No Category Reason for Shortfall 
1 Feature Films Out of the planned 17 feature films, there was a shortfall of 10. Of 
these, 4 are still in production and will be completed in the current 
financial year. The remaining 6 did not materialise because the 
co-producers did not take the required steps to move the projects 
forward. 
2. Children's 
Film 
Out of the planned 28 projects, 18 are still in production and will 
be completed in the current financial year. The delay is mainly 
because most of these are animation projects, which take more 
production time to achieve the required quality. 
3. Co Production 
with other 
countries 
The production of this project is still ongoing as it is a large -scale 
project that depends on the availability of key actor dates aligning. 
This project will be completed in the current fiscal year. 

44 
 
It may be noted and taken into consideration that the Filmmakers currently have limited 
opportunities to submit projects under the DCDFC scheme, primarily through ministry -
supported platforms like Film Bazaar and Doc Film Bazaar. The selection process, 
based on criteria like market viability and co -production potential, narrows down 
submissions significantly. Additionally, NFDC’s investment cap at 40% of production 
costs makes securing the remaining funds for the Co -producers challenging, further 
restricting the production of regional language films 
(File No. H-11013/9/2025-PC CELL dated 30.06.2025) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
All INDIA RADIO (AIR) AND FM 
The Committee note that under AIR, during the FY 2024 -25 as against budgetary 
allocations of Rs. 145.02 crore (at BE stage) and Rs. 89.14 crore (at RE stage) the 
actual expenditure upto December, 2024 has been Rs. 17.62 crore which is a meagre 
19.77% of RE allocations.   Even during the FY 2023 -24, AIR witnessed less utilization 
of funds and the actual expenditure for this period was Rs. 30.48 crore which was 
71.92% of RE allocations. The Committee note that the common problem under BIND 
Scheme has also affected the performance of AIR which include (i) Broadcast 
equipments being imported; and (ii) Man power shortage. Further, with respect to 
digitization of AIR, the Ministry informed that most of the Studios of All India Radio 
stations have been digitized and rest of the Studios is being digitized in the plan 2021 -
26. The Committee note that during the year 2025 -26, as per approved Schemes under 
BIND, Schemes/projects under implementation included (a)  Setting up  of 59 FM 
transmitters; (b)  Setting up of visual radio system at 33 Akashvani Station; (c) 
Refurbishing of Studios at 34 Stations; (d)   Replacement of AC Plant at 38 Stations; (e) 
Replacement of DG set  at 15 stations; (f) Replacement/provision of STL: 20 nos; 
(g) Provision of DSNG Van at Delhi. As informed by the Ministry, since it is the last 
financial year (2025 -26) of the plan (2021 -26) to digitize AIR, the Committee hope that 
all the targets are met and apprise them accordingly. The Committee also desire for the 
action taken alongwith the outcome on the following recommendations: 
(i) The Ministry should have concrete time -plan for digitization of all AIR 
stations and apprise of the Committee about the  same; 
 
(ii)  The Ministry should  address the concerns impacting the financial and 
physical targets under AIR; 
 
(iii) The Ministry should improve the content of the AIR to attract the 
listeners and generate revenue; and 
 
(iv) The Ministry may achieve the targets set during 2025 -26 for 
expansion/Coverage of private FM radio in 234 new/uncovered cities 
through 730 channels and apprise the Committee about the action taken 
and outcome of the auction of FM Radio Phase-3. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:–  
Akashvani has digitalized its 38 MW transmitters by replacing outlived transmitters 
by modern state of the art digital transmitters. Digitalization of rest of the transmitters is a 
policy matter and will depend necessity of digital transmission on MW band and 
availability of affordable digital receivers in the country. The measures taken so far for 
adaption of new technologies are as under: 
 

45 
 
1. Replacement/ upgradation of outlived 38 MW and 3 SW transmitters by state of art 
digital MW transmitters (DRM). 
2. Replacement of 6 outlived MW transmitters by state of art digital ready MW 
transmitters. 
3. Replacement of outlived 12 MW 1 kW transmitters by 1/10 kW FM transmitters. 
4. Replacement/ upgradation of 111 outlived FM transmitters. 
5. Digitalization and networking of studios by installing state of art digital equipment for 
production, storage and sharing of programmes. 
6. Setting up of Visual radio system at 34Akashvani Stations have been approved. 
 
Digitalization of FM transmitters has not started as quality of analog FM is excellent 
and also due to availability of low-cost receivers.  
Out of 232 studios, Akashvani has 133 fully digitalized production studios and 
remaining 99 studios are partially digitalized by providing computer -based recording and 
production work stations. An amount of Rs. 60.76 crore has been approved under BIND 
Scheme (2021 -26) towards modernization and digitalization of Studios/New Studios, 
fully digitalization of these studios will depend upon availability of funds and approval by 
the competent authority in coming time. 
 
The Ministry should address the concerns impacting the financial and physical 
targets under AIR;  
Reply: 
Akashvani is regularly taking steps to address the  concerns impacting the financial and 
physical targets. In this regard, monitoring mechanism at all the zones is regularly 
monitoring the progress of the projects under Akashvani Directorate. Procurement 
procedures have been streamlined. Project review meetings are held regularly at Zonal 
level & HQ level and various activities involved in procurement of capital equipment and 
execution of works are critically assessed & targets are fixed.  
All the initiatives have been taken for acquiring lands from the state Government where 
land required for new installation.  
The frequency of monitoring meetings has been increased at all levels of Directorate &  
Prasar Bharati Secretariat; Use of digital platform viz. e-office, e-tendering, procurement 
through GEM, Video conference is also being utilized; 
 
The Ministry should improve the content of the AIR to attract the listeners and 
generate revenue; and  
Reply: 
i) AIR is broadcasting programmes to meet the aspirations of a huge 
population and diversity in terms of ethno -linguistic and cultural 
characteristics, agro-climatic conditions, socio-economic status and so on.  
ii) The content on AIR is designed with a view to make it a mean of 
interactive communication among the various agencies forming a 
composite society. The AIR puts out programmes on a variety of themes 
tailor-made to suit the needs, concerns and aspirations of target 
audiences.  These include:- 
• Development of a learning society 
• Inculcating scientific temper 
• Empowerment of women 
• Amelioration of the under-privileged 
• Spreading the message of planned parenthood 

46 
 
• Diffusion of agricultural innovation 
• Rural regeneration with farmers’ welfare 
• Skill development to capture benefits of the demographic dividend 
• Promoting environmental hygiene 
• Disaster management through swift and prompt dissemination of rescue, 
relief and rehabilitation efforts. 
• Content being the basic structure which lends coherence to the objective 
of communication, forms the backbone of any communication medium. 
The importance of content is paramount as it adds, quality and fulfils the 
objectives of reaching out to the masses.  
• As the process of content designing is a dynamic one, Akashvani is 
constantly re-calibrating its content in order to make it more attractive and 
listener friendly to suit the aspirations of the diverse demographics of the 
country. The lengthy formats are being replaced by short format 
programmes to make the content more participatory. 
• While continuing to carry out the mandate for Public service broadcasting, 
Akashvani has marched forward embracing new content themes, 
presentation styles, programme formats and technological innovations. 
Focusing on its motto - “Information, Education & Entertainment”, 
Akashvani is making constant efforts to reach every listener through 
variety of programmes in various formats, for different categories of 
listeners, in different languages and dialects across the country to cater the 
need of every section of society. 
• Various steps to strengthen the content and beef up the services in the 
light of new technological evolution have been taken notwithstanding the 
various challenges posed for continuation of services during the tough 
times. 
• Akashvani has paid special emphasis on interactive programmes including 
SMS based services, registering its presence on various new and social 
media platforms and also commenced live steaming of some 
channels/services, Akashvani Podcast has potential to engage more 
listeners.  
• Akashvani has also been broadcasting ‘AIRnext’ a programme for the 
youth and by the youth in different languages and dialects engaging the 
youth of the country . The Digital platforms of Akashvani are being 
strengthened to compete with the market. 
The Ministry may achieve the targets set during 2025 -26 for expansion/Coverage 
of private FM radio in 234 new/uncovered cities through 730 channels and apprise 
the Committee about the action taken and outcome of the auction of FM Radio 
Phase-3. 
Reply: 
20 applications were received in response to Notice Inviting Applications for 3rd 
Batch of e-auctions in 234 cities with 730 channels. 
The Ministry is awaiting comments of Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of 
Security Clearance for applicant companies and Directors. 
The e-bidding portal developed by e -auctioneer (M/s MSTC Ltd) has been certified by 
STQC and a demo session has been held with the applicants. 
 
(File No. H-11013/9/2025-PC CELL dated 30.06.2025) 
 

47 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
HUMAN RESOURCE IN PRASAR BHARATI 
The Committee note that at present the sanctioned staff strength of Prasar 
Bharati is 45,791. Out of this, 26,129 are for Akashvani/All India Radio and 19,662 are 
for Doordarshan (excluding 2,038 posts which were abolished under Annual Direct 
Recruitment Plan 2002 to 2008-09). As against this sanctioned strength of 45,791, there 
are 30,221 vacancies in Prasar Bharati. Of this, 13,970 are in Doordarshan and 16,251 
in All India Radio (AIR). The Committee note that due to acute shortage of permanent 
employees, Prasar Bharati is meeting its urgent requirements by hiring large number of 
staff on contractual basis under Contractual Engagement Policy 2021 (CEP -2021) of 
Prasar Bharati to support production and related activities of the organization including 
manning operations related to its newly launched OTT platform. The Committee also 
note that at present Prasar Bharati is engaged in HR Transformation exercise through a 
manpower audit agency and on completion of this exercise, steps for the recruitment 
process shall be initiated. The Committee have been informed that pending the outcome 
of the ongoing exercise related to HR Transformation, the existing officers of primarily 
Engineering cadre and to some extent of News cadre have been assigned with 
additional responsibilities of programme policy, sales/marketing, administration as well 
as support functions (such as legal, regulatory etc.) at zonal, Directorate and PB 
Secretariat levels. Whereas at field offices/production centres, the existing programme 
officers are shouldering the responsibilities of programming activities and Engineering 
officers and employees for technical operations.  
 
The Committee note that the situation of vacancies in Prasar Bharati has become 
perennial which is undesirable given the fact that in order to sustain efficiency, skill 
requirement is being met with stop gap arrangement which is not a plausible solution to 
the problem.  Even while examining DFG (2023 -24), the Committee were informed that 
the final report of Manpower Audit (MPA) has been accepted by Prasar Bharati wherein 
substantial restructuring in the organization has been recommended [Please refer 46 th 
Report the Committee 2023 -24 on DFG (2023 -24)]. The Committee note that despite 
acute shortage of man power in the organisation over the years and acceptance of the 
final report of Manpower Audit (MPA), HR Transformation exercise is pending/still going 
on. Further, according to the Ministry after conclusion of this exercise and submission of 
its report and its acceptance/ approval of the same by Prasar Bharati/Ministry of I&B, a 
clear picture regarding the recruitments to be made will emerge. Taking exception with 
respect to the time taken for filling up the vacancies, the Committee recommend the 
Ministry to take it up on priority basis so as to have a pool for dedicated workforce with 
specialized technical/industry skills to cater to the need of both traditional and digital 
media /evolving dynamic media landscape. The Ministry may apprise the Committee 
about the (i) Final assessment of manpower required/number of posts required to be 
filled up along with the time line for the same; and (ii) Timeline and outcome of the HR 
Transformation exercise being carried out. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting submitted as 
under:–  
As a part of HR transformation exercise in Phase -I, the agency E&Y has 
recommended 14902 posts for the functioning of Prasar  Bharati subject to 
implementation of the following levers: 
i) Outsourcing of functions/ services: 
a) None core Engineering activities 

48 
 
b) Office cleaning, Security workforce, Drivers, etc. 
c) O&M of Transmitters 
ii) Scaling down/ closure of unpopular services and obsolete mode of broadcasting 
a) Closure of 28 PGF 
b) Closure of 31 AIR channels (comprising of VBS, PC, Rainbow and FM 
Gold channels) 
c) Closure of 81 LRS & 2 CRS 
d) Closure of 78 AIR transmitters (42 MW, 1 SW and 35 Relay FM 
transmitters). 
 
iii) Automation &digitization process 
The number (14902) has been arrived at by leveraging the various levers and might 
take a few years to implement and hence arriving at the proposed headcount will be a 
gradual process. 
2. In absence of implementation of the levers additional staff would be required to the 
tune of ~6000 and ~2000 across AIR stations & DD Kendra respectively. Therefore, 
during the transition period till the completion of HR transformation process about 8000 
staff to be made available over and above 14902 staff as assessed by E&Y. 
Further, E&Y has indicated in its report that in final deliberations with divisional 
heads, a request for 18 -20% (2784) additional manpower in various cadres over and 
above the suggested numbers (i.e. 14902) across Prasar Bharati. In the interim (during 
transition to the new organisation structure), Senior Leadership (CEO/Chairman) may 
exercise their discretion to approve the request for additional manpower based on 
organizational needs. 
3. In the Phase -1 of HR transformation exercise, the agency has submitted its 
reports related to the 6 deliverables. However, the Deliverable 4 is being examined. 
Once the same is finalised/accepted, the agency will submit a consolidated report. With 
this, Phase-I part of the HR transformation exercise will be concluded. 
4. Considering the critical positions that need to be filled in, E&Y has identified 
3130 posts that need to be filed on priority basis and it has drafted a recruitment plan, 
which is spread across Short, Medium and Long -term over a period of 0 -8 months (Apr 
2025 to Dec2025),9 -12 months (Jan 2026 to Mar 2026) and 12+ months (Apr 2026 to 
Dec2 026). The break-up of recruitment plan is given below:  
Roles/ posts 
specific to: 
Short-Term  
(0-8 months: Apr 
2025 to Dec 2025) 
Mid-Term  
(9-12 months: Jan 
2026 to Mar 2026) 
Long-term  
(12+ months: Apr 
2026 to Dec 2026) 
Programme 
specific 
1149 394 1223 
Admin & others 96 65 187 
Engineering 
roles 
3 2 11 
Total 1248 461 1421 
 
Positions remaining vacant after Dec’2026 may be filled on ongoing basis considering 
the manpower strength, retirements and business needs of the organisation. 

49 
 
5. Actions being initiated for implementation of levers such as outsourcing, 
closure of services, automation, etc. 
In addition to the above, restructuring of various Divisions and functions of Prasar  
Bharati as recommended by E&Y may take time as it involves approvals related to 
creation of new posts, up -gradation/ down -gradation/ surrender of posts, etc. from PB 
Board, MIB and DoE. 
Further, the recommendations made by E&Y in its HR transformation exercise in 
Phase 1 are to be submitted before the PB Board and Ministry for acceptance. 
6. Subsequently, the agency is to execute the Phase -2 part of HR transformation 
exercise, which broadly covers capacity building / training and change management for 
PB stakeholders including monitoring and evaluation of change process and 
continuously review and improve the restructuring process. The timeline for execution of 
Phase-2 is 6 months from the date of work order, which is yet to begin pending 
completion of Phase 1 exercise.  However, the Phase -2 part can be executed  parallelly 
with implementation of levers.  
i) A pool of dedicated workforce with specialised technical/ required industry skills 
to cater to the need of both traditional and digital media/ evolving dynamic media 
landscape in view of the following developments in the sector.  
The Media & Entertainment sector is experiencing disruptive innovations. These 
innovations are altering businesses and business models, requiring industries 
and sectors to reimagine their future. The recommendations outlined in this 
manpower report offer a roadmap for Prasar  Bharati to align its workforce with 
evolving operational needs and industry dynamics. In the restructuring part of the 
Prasar Bharati, the agency has recommended new roles related to Digital Media 
& Platforms, OTT, Corporate Planning & Strategy, Content Leverage, Content 
cross-Pollination, Sales & Marketing, Compliance & Liaising, etc. The agency has 
also defined primary responsibilities, Key performance indicators, experience and 
qualification in r/o of these new roles. 
Further, in its recommendations, the agency has identified and aligned manpower 
needed vis -à-vis changes in PB’s goals, technology upgradation (production & 
transmission), etc. Implementation of the manpower changes proposed in the report 
would require re-skilling of manpower to adapt to new ways of working, hiring for missing 
skills and re-deploying people to the right roles. 
ii) To apprise the Committee about the final assessment of manpower 
required/ number of posts required to be filled up along with the time line for the 
same. 
The agency has assessed requirement of manpower as 14902 persons subject to 
implementation of levers which include phasing out of obsolete modes of 
transmission, outsourcing of administrative roles, outsourcing of non -core 
engineering activities, Rationalisation of unviable Production Centres  & 
Transmission Facilities, optimizing the need for support staff by leveraging e -
office and digital ways of working. 
Further, in its report, E&Y has indicated that in final deliberations with divisional heads, a 
request was made for 18 -20% (2784) additional manpower in various cadres over and 
above the suggested numbers (i.e. 14902) across PB.  

50 
 
The agency has also identified 3130 critical positions mostly in Programme and Admin 
cadres and prepared a recruitment plan therefor, which is spread across in 3 phases 
commencing from April 2025 to December 2026 which is under consideration. 
iii) To apprise the Committee about the Time line and outcome of the HR 
transformation exercise being carried out. 
As outcome of the HR Transformation exercise, it is envisaged that Prasar  
Bharati will emerge stronger, more agile, and better positioned to deliver high -
quality broadcasting services that meet the evolving needs of its audiences in the 
digital age and effectively fulfils its mandate as the Public service Broadcaster of 
India. 
Regarding timeline, out of the two phases, phase 1 is on the verge of completion and 
Phase-2 is about to be commenced. Phase 2 is planned to be completed in 6 months 
from the date of work order. However, restructuring of PB functioning and 
implementation levers may take time as it involves approvals related to creation of new 
posts, up-gradation/ down-gradation/ surrender of posts, etc. from PB Board, MIB and 
DoE. However, the Phase -2 part can be executed  parallelly with implementation of 
levers. 
(File No. H-11013/9/2025-PC CELL dated 30.06.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
SUPPORTING COMMUNITY RADIO MOVEMENT IN INDIA 
The Committee note that the Community Radio Stations play a significant role in 
empowering communities by means of dissemination of crucial information, particularly 
to rural and remote communities. To support the Community Radio Stations, a Central 
Sector Scheme namely ‘Supporting Community Radio Movement in India’ is being 
implemented by the Ministry.  With respect to budgetary allocations for supporting 
Community Radio Stations, the Committee note that Rs. 17.40 crore has been 
earmarked for the FY 2025 -26 (at BE stage). During the FY 2024 -25, the BE and RE 
allocations were Rs. 5.00 crore and Rs. 14.73 crore, respectively and the actual 
expenditure till 30th January, 2025 was Rs. 3.83 crore which is 26.02 % of RE 
allocations. One of the reasons for less expenditure was that no demand was received 
for financial assistance by any operational Community Radio Station. The Committee 
also note that at present there are 530 Community Radio Stations (CRSs) in India and 
out of these, a total of 511 CRS are having valid Grant of Permission Agreement 
(GOPA) whereas the GOPA of remaining CRS are in the process of renewal/extension.  
While noting that there were ‘No’ Community Radio Stations (CRSs) in Goa, Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu and Lakshadweep, the Committee sought reasons for 
the same. To this, the Ministry informed that in Goa, Letter of intent (LoI) has been 
issued for setting up of 01 Community Radio Station which is in the pipeline to become 
operational soon. Further, no application has been received from Daman and Diu and 
Lakshadweep for setting up of CRS. The Committee note that the major challenges/ 
hindrances witnessed under the Scheme include (a) Awareness about the Community 
Radio Stations amongst eligible applicants; (b) Lack of financial resources with 
applicants; (c) Delay in Clearance from WPC/MHA/MOD.  
 
Regarding the pending applications for Community Radio Station license, the 
Ministry informed that a total of 77 applications for Community Radio Station were 
pending with the either MIB/Wireless, Planning and Coordination (WPC)/ MHA/ Ministry 

51 
 
of Defence (MOD), which were at various stages of processing. Further, the Committee 
also note that a total of 135 applications were received during the FY 2024 -25. Out of 
these, for 40 applications, Letter of intent (LoI) were issued. A total of 13 applications 
were rejected due to non -meeting the eligibility criterion or due to clearances not given 
by the concerned Departments/ Ministries (As per the extant guidelines, the applications 
are required to be cleared from MHA, Ministry of Defence  (MOD) and Ministry of 
Communications). The Ministry also clarified that after obtaining LOI, applicant applies 
to Ministry of Communication for Wireless Operating License before commissioning the 
CRS and the License for operating CRS is issued by the Ministry of Communications. 
Regarding the timeline and plan of action to remove the pendency of applications the 
reply of the Ministry was silent. The Committee also observed that there are no 
Community Radio Stations (CRSs) broadcasting in Konkani and Sanskrit spoken 
States/places. However, the permission for setting up of CRS in Goa has been given 
and the applicant is in the process of setting up of CRS. The Committee observe that 
CRS is a powerful tool of social change and a repository of local folk music, cultural 
heritage and has potential to strengthen people’s participation in development 
programmes through its holistic approach. The Committee desire for action taken on the 
following observations/ recommendations: 
 
(i) Ensure that the procedural clearance are done in the current financial 
year for setting up of Community Radio Station in Goa; 
 
(ii) Hold comprehensive outreach campaign/awareness camps to raise 
awareness about the  supporting Community Radio Movement in India , 
especially in regions with no or limited CRS presence, such as 
Lakshadweep and Daman and Diu. The Ministry may formulate SOP for 
setting up of CRS so that people are aware of the procedural hurdles 
and benefits of Community Radio Stations;  
 
(iii) Establish a fast -track system for the clearance of CRS applications 
pending with various Ministries /Organizations like WPC/MHA/MOD to 
address the bottleneck in license approval, if any;  
 
(iv) Focus on expanding CRS operations in under -represented linguistic 
areas, such as Konkani -speaking and Sanskrit-speaking regions . Also 
encourage Community Radio Stations to broadcast content in scheduled 
languages and promote the preservation and dissemination of local 
dialects, folk traditions, and regional heritage; 
 
(v) Invest in technological upgrades and training to improve the reach, 
quality, and operational efficiency of existing stations, especially in 
digital transmission and content delivery . Take measures to avoid 
under-utilization of funds observed during the year 2024-25. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting submitted as 
under:–  
 
Sl. No  Observations Action Taken 
1 Ensure that the procedural 
clearance are done in the 
current financial year for setting 
GOPA has been signed with the 
applicant and Applicant was requested 
to start operation of the CRS as soon 

52 
 
up of Community Radio Station 
in Goa 
as possible and intimate the Date of 
commissioning to Ministry. 
2 Hold comprehensive outreach 
campaign/awareness camps to 
raise awareness about the 
supporting Community Radio 
Movement in India, especially in 
regions with no or limited CRS 
presence, such as Lakshadweep 
and Daman and Diu. The 
Ministry may formulate SOP for 
setting up of CRS so that people 
are aware of the procedural 
hurdles and benefits of 
Community Radio Stations; 
Total  05 Community Radio 
Awareness workshops has been 
planned at dark districts (in respect 
to CRS) in the financial year (2025 -
26) and efforts will be made to invite 
eligible and aspiring entities from 
Lakshadweep, Daman and Diu.  As 
advised by the committee, Standard 
Operating Procedure (SoP) as well 
as FAQ (Frequently asked 
Questions) were prepared and 
posted for the awareness of 
applicants as well as internal 
process. The detailed steps taken 
already provided in the reply of Para 
1 for ease of applicants. 
3 Establish a fast-track system for 
the clearance of CRS 
applications pending with 
various Ministries/Organizations 
like WPC/ MHA/ MOD to address 
the bottleneck in license 
approval, if any; 
Applications are being processed 
through an online mode only and 
regular meetings are being held with 
the concerned Ministries to expedite 
the clearances for fast tracking of the 
applications. 
4 Focus on expanding CRS 
operations in under -represented 
linguistic areas, such as 
Konkani-speaking and Sanskrit -
speaking regions. Also 
encourage Community Radio 
Stations to broadcast content in 
scheduled languages and 
promote the preservation and 
dissemination of local dialects, 
folk traditions, and regional 
heritage; 
Awareness generation activities have 
been planned in  such areas. And, 
advisory shall be issued to all 
operational stations to broadcast 
content in scheduled languages. 
5 Invest in technological upgrades 
and training to improve the 
reach, quality, and operational 
efficiency of existing stations, 
especially in digital 
transmission and content 
The Amount of Grant has been 
increased so that licensees of CRSs 
can install modern equipments 
including Solar Energy Setup. Further, 
Training and Capacity building have 
been planned with the operational 

53 
 
delivery. Take measures to 
avoid under -utilization of funds 
observed during the year 2024 -
25. 
stations. Further, wider publicity of the 
CRS scheme will be implemented to 
invite more CRSs to apply for the 
reimbursement of cost of setting -up of 
CRSs to increase fund- utilization. 
 
(File No. H-11013/9/2025-PC CELL dated 30.06.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
FILM SECTOR  
 
NATIONAL CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE (NCOE) FOR ANIMATION, VISUAL 
EFFECTS (VFX), GAMING, COMICS AND EXTENDED REALITY ( AVGC-XR) 
 
The Committee note that subsequent to presentation of Budget during the FY 
2022-23, an AVGC Prom 
otion Task Force was constituted on 08.04.2022 which submitted its Report on 
December, 2022. It included (i) Report of the AVGC Promotional Task Force on realizing 
AVGC-XR Sector potential in India; (ii) Draft National Policy for Growth of AVGC Sector 
in India; (iii) Draft Model State Policy for Growth of AVGC sector in the States; and (iv) 
Recommendation for setting up of a National Centre of Excellence (NCoE)) for AVGC. 
Based on the recommendations of the Task force and gauging the importance of the 
AVGC sector, the Central Government decided to setup the NCoE and approved the 
Cabinet Note on 18.09.2024 for setting up of a ‘National Centre of Excellence (NCoE) 
known as the ‘Indian Institute of Creative Technologies (IICT)’. This IICT will act as the 
anchor institution for the growth of AVGC -XR sector in the Country on the lines of IITs 
and IIMs.  The Committee note that IICT will open avenues for future generations in the 
AVGC segment and ensure that the progress made in the field of AVGC is equally 
benefitted by people in tier 2 & tier 3 cities across the Country. It is to conduct academic 
courses as well as involve in setting up of incubation centers with latest infrastructure 
and technology and will also function as a mentoring institution to the AVGC industry. 
The Committee also learnt that IICT will support at least 5 Regional Centers of 
Excellence in collaboration with the States through the hub and spoke model wherein 
IICT would be the Hub and State Regional Centers will be the Spokes.  The Ministry has 
informed that the Cabinet has approved setting up of NCoE with one -time budgetary 
grant of Rs. 391.15 crore as Section 8 company under the Companies Act, 2013 with 
the sharing pattern of Government (48%), Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce 
& Industry (26%) and Confederation of Indian Industry (26%). Lease Deed between 
Govt. of India and Govt. Maharashtra was signed on 08.10.2024 to set up the Institute at 
Goregaon, Mumbai. The company under Section 8, Company Act 2013 was registered 
and incorporated on 25.12.2024. The first Board meeting of the Company was held on 
17.01.2025. 
 
Further, the Committee note that a few factors are impeding growth of India's 
AVGC-XR sector like funding scarcity; a critical skill gap due to insufficient formalized 
education and infrastructure limitations; original IP development lags, hindering global 
competitiveness; Regulatory uncertainties, particularly in gaming; etc. The Committee 
hope that the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry will realize the potential of the Indian 
AVGC industry and recommend the Ministry to ensure:- 
(i) To fix year -wise and quarter -wise targets for each of the initiatives 
taken/planned under AVGC Sector; 
 

54 
 
(ii) To apprise the Committee about the timeline and targets fixed for 
NCoE/IICT/WAVES and about the tangible outcome of the initiatives taken 
under them along with the composition of the board of NCoE; 
 
(iii) IICT should focus on developing a comprehensive curriculum and 
advanced world -class infrastructure for filling up the critical skill gaps in the 
sector. There should be an emphasis on nurturing talent from Tier -2 and Tier-
3 cities too; 
 
(iv) Further, while noting that there is no rule of law related to ‘Animation, 
Visual Effects, Gaming and Comics (AVGC) and the Ministry is in the process 
of finalizing a National level policy for the growth of AVGC -XR in the Country, 
the Committee feel that the Ministry should expedite the formulation of a 
Policy with clear guidelines and regulations as it will provide a conducive 
environment for the industry to thrive and attract global investors. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the Policy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting submitted as 
under:–  
 
Based on the recommendations of AVGC Task Force 2022, the IICT (Indian Institute of 
Creative Technologies), WAVES (World Audio Visual & Entertainment Summit) and 
Create in India Mission (CIIM) were conceptualised.  
a. IICT (Indian Institute of Creative Technologies):  
• Timeline- Union Cabinet approved to set -up of IICT in Sept 2024, and in 
December 2024 it was registered as a Section 8 Company. Subsequently, in April 
2025, a temporary campus of IICT was set up at the NFDC campus in Mumbai. 
Its headquarters is being now developed on a 10 -acre campus in Film City, 
Mumbai. 
• Governance Structure of IICT: Governing Council (20 members), Board of 
Directors (8 members), and four administrative councils on Academia, Skills, 
Industry Development, and R&D, chaired by the Secretary, M/o I&B. 
• Equity Structure: 48% (GoI (34%) + Govt. of Maharashtra  (14%)), 26% (CII), 26% 
(FICCI) 
• Special emphasis is being placed on developing regional IICTs across multiple 
states to ensure Pan -India footprint, quick access and inclusivity in the vision on 
regional inclusion. 
b. WAVES (World Audio Visual & Entertainment Summit):  
Inaugural edition of WAVES held from 1 st-4th May 2025 at Jio World Convention Centre, 
Mumbai. It saw wide participation of policymakers, investors, and creative professionals 
across media Sectors -Animation, VFX, Gaming, Music, Broadcasting, Films, XR/VR, 
etc. - for investment, trade, and innovation. The summit had PM -CEO Roundtable, 
Global Media Dialogue, plenary & conference sessions, WAVES Bazaar (international 
B2B marketplace), WAVEXcelerator (for startup funding & pitches), CreatoSphere, and 
exhibitions like Bharat Pavilion. 
 

55 
 
c. National Policy for AVGC-XR: Create in India Mission 
In this regard, the proposed policy, namely Create in India Mission, is being drafted 
considering the key recommendations of the AVGC Task Force Report, 2022. 
(File No. H-11013/9/2025-PC CELL dated 30.06.2025) 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
    11 August, 2025  Chairperson, 
 20 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

56 
 
Appendix – I 
A. Achievements in NER for 2024-25 under BIND Scheme 
 
Name of 
Components Target Achievement / Status Reason for 
short fall 
FM transmitters 
– Expansion /  
Replacement 
 1 KW FM at 
Namsai,  
  
Tower work allotted to CCW 
work under progress. Tower 
work is likely to be completed 
by Dec. 2025. Transmitter 
and allied equipment  have 
been received and are under 
installation. The set up is 
likely to be completed by Dec. 
2025.  
 Delay in erection 
of tower works due 
to technical and 
administrative 
issues and limited 
venders in erection 
of  single  tower. 
 
FM Transmitters  to 
be installed    10 
KW FM at 
Kokrajhar  
Kokrajhar commissioned on 
03.01.2025. 
 
NA 
Upgradation of 
public service 
Broadcasting 
infrastructure 
including 
Expansion of DD 
Free Dish 
Platform, 
technical 
facilities for Live 
Coverage. 
Replacement of  
STL at 5 AIR  
locations  (Imphal 
(2), Agartala (2) & 
Kohima(1). 
Tender has been cancelled 
due to vacation of frequency. 
Specification will have to be 
revised. 
Tender has been 
cancelled due to 
withdrawal  of  
frequency by DoT. 
Specifications are 
under revision. 
Augmentation of 
News Production 
Equipment          
(North Zone)  
Desk Top            
Computers for    
NSD &  RNUs-  166 
Nos. 
TV sets for NSD & 
RNUs- 62 Nos  
 
a. Purchase of Desktop 
computers taken up by the 
Zonal Office. Items supplied. 
b. The work is likely to be 
completed in this FY 2025-26 
NA 
Office Automation 
for e-governance   
E-office is successfully 
implemented 
NA 
Digital Content 
Generation & 
Dissemination-
Cloud hiring 
charges 
Streaming Services, Social 
Media & Digital Platforms, 
and Cloud based content 
sharing being done by PBNS 
& IT. The work is likely to be 
completed in this FY 2025-26 
NA 
Facelift of DD & 
AIR Channels 
  
Visual Radio 
Stations at 33 
places. 
Refurbishing of 
Visual Radio 
Stations at 8 places 
(Itanagar, 
Guwahati, Imphal, 
Shillong, Aizawal, 
Gangtok, 
Kohima&Agartala). 
Tender is under Technical 
evaluation. The work is likely 
to be completed in this FY 
2025-26 
 
NA 

57 
 
studio at 34 
places. 
Replacememt of 
AC plant at 38 
places. 
Replacement of 
Genset at 15 
places. 
Refurbishing of 
studio at 06 places 
(Tezu, Itanagar, 
Dibrugarh, Jorhat, 
Silchar& Tura). 
Tezu, Dibrugarh, Jorhat  
&Silchar  - Work in progress.  
Itanagar&Tura-DTE prepared.  
The work is likely to be 
completed in this FY 2025-26 
NA 
Replacememt of 
AC plant at 5 
places (Imphal, 
Shillong(2), 
Mokokchung&Gang
tok). 
Shillong, Shillong (Jagg 
Studio), Imphal, Mokokchung 
– Installation completed and 
under testing. 
Gangtok – DTE prepared. 
The work is likely to be 
completed in this FY 2025-26 
NA 
 
B. Achievements of CRS in North-East Region for the FY 2024-25 
Sl. 
No. 
Description No. of Events 
1.  Sammelans 02 
2.  Workshops 02 
3.  Letter of Intent (LoIs) Applications received (CRS Setup) 19 
4.  LoI Issued 05 
5.  GOPA signed for fresh and renewal 05 
6.  No. Of Grants Disbursed 02 
 
 
C. District-wise disbursement of financial assistance to Community Radio 
Stations (CRS) located in the North-East for the FY 2024–25 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Organisation District where 
CRS is 
Located 
State /UT Grant Amount 
(in Rs.) 
1.  Kha Manipur Kakching Manipur 1,200,000 
2.  Khongjom War Memorial 
Trust 
Thoubal Manipur 727,200 
 

58 
 
Appendix– II 
Physical targets under BIND Scheme for NER 2025-26 
 
Mode Name of Components Target 
Scheme 
Mode 
Modernization (including  
Digitization),Augmentation & 
Replacement   of Transmitters 
50M SS FM Towers at Namsai. 
FM transmitters – Expansion /   
Replacement 
Total Numbers of FM Transmitters   to be 
installed     
 1 KW FM at Namsai.  
  
Strengthening of Border Area 
Coverage              under  Continuing  
Projects 
 
Upgradation of public service  
Broadcasting infrastructure  
including Expansion of DD Free Dish 
Platform, technical facilities for Live 
Coverage. 
Replacement of   STL at 5AIR  locations  
(Imphal (2), Agartala (2) & Kohima (1). 
Augmentation of News Production 
Equipment          (North Zone)  
Desk Top            Computers for    NSD &  
RNUs-  166 Nos. 
TV sets for NSD & RNUs- 62 Nos  
Office Automation for e-governance   
Digital Content Generation & 
Dissemination 
Expansion of     reach of Public   
Service Broadcasting including   in 
Strategic /areas of national interest 
(LWE, Border, aspirational districts, 
other such areas   strategic / national 
importance)  
 
Project 
Mode 
FMisation in strategic areas  
 
Facelift of DD & 
AIR Channels 
  
Visual Radio Stations at 33 places. 
 
Refurbishing of studio at 34 places. 
 
 
Replacement of AC plant at 30 
places. 
Replacement of Genset at 15 places. 
Visual Radio Stations at  8 places 
(Itanagar, Guwahati, Imphal, Shillong, 
Aizawal, Gangtok, Kohima &Agartala). 
Refurbishing of studio at 06 places (Tezu, 
Itanagar, Dibrugarh, Jorhat, Silchar& 
Tura). 
Replacememt of AC plant at 5 places 
(Imphal, Shillong(2), Mokokchung  & 
Gangtok). 
Completed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

59 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND  
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY- FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 11 th August, 2025 from 1530 hours to 1550              
hours in Committee Room No. ‘B, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY- Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
4. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
5. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
6. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai  Maadam 
7. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
8. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
9. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
10. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
11. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
12. Shri Devesh Shakya 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
13. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
14. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
15. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
16. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad  
17. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
18. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi   - Director 
3. Shri Amrish Kumar             - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt one draft Subject Report relating to Ministry of 

60 
 
Communications (Department of Posts) and four draft Action Taken Reports on Demands 
for Gran ts (2025 -26) relating to the Ministries/Departments under the  jurisdiction of the 
Committee. 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up the following five draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption:- 
 
(i) XXXX…...XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX… 
(ii) XXXX……XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX… 
(iii) XXXX….XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX… 
(iv) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eleventh 
Report (18 th Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2025 -26)” relating to the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
(v) XXXX….XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX… 
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without modifications. 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and present 
the same to the House during the current Session of Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
**** 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
XXXX- Matter not related to this Report. 

61 
 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR ELEVENTH REPORT  
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by  the 
Government 
 
          Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1,4,5,10,11,12,13,14 & 15 
Total 9 
Percentage    60 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
         Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
        Rec. Sl. No.: NIL 
 
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
        Rec. Sl. Nos.: 2,3,6,7,8 & 9  
Total 06 
Percentage 40 
 