STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVIEW OF MECHANISM TO CURB FAKE NEWS 
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2025 / Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
22 
 


 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
REVIEW OF MECHANISM TO CURB FAKE NEWS 
 
                                Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 04.10.2025 
Presented to Lok Sabha on        02.12.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on        02.12.2025 
 
 
                    LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                   NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2025 / Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
 


 
 
CCIT No. 426 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 

 CONTENTS  
  Pg. No. 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25 & 2025-26) (ii) 
 INTRODUCTION (iii) 
 REPORT  
 PART-I  
I.  Introductory   
 (a) Fake News  
 (b) Proliferation of Fake News and its causes  
 (c) Challenges posed by ‘Fake News’  
 (d) Cases related to ‘Fake News’ 
(i) Print Media 
(ii) Electronic Media 
(iii) Digital Media 
 
II.  Measures/Provisions/Mechanism to curb Fake News 
(a) Regulatory framework for curbing Fake News 
(b) Self Regulatory Mechanism and Fake News  
(c) Penal Provisions 
 
III.  Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
(a) Time taken to address the complain 
 
IV.  Artificial Intelligence, Algorithm and Fake News 
(a) Artificial Intelligence and Fake News 
(b)  Algorithm and Fake News 
 
V.  Challenges associated with Fake News crossing international borders 
and  vis-à-vis International collaboration 
 
VI.  Awareness/Training  
VII.  Miscellaneous   
   
 PART-II  
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
   
 APPENDICES  
(i) Minutes of the 6th Sitting of the Committee held on 21st November, 2024  
(ii) Minutes of the 19th Sitting of the Committee held on 7th May, 2025  
(iii) Minutes of the 22nd Sitting of the Committee held on 9th September, 2025  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Composition of the Standing Committee on Communications and 
Information Technology (2024-25)** 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
12. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
13. Shri Shafi Parambil 
14. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
15. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
16. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
17. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
18. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
19. Shri Devesh Shakya 
20. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Saket Gokhale* 
23. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
24. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
27. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Y.M. Kandpal  — Additional Secretary 
2.  Smt. A. Jyothirmayi  — Director 
3.  Smt. Rinky Singh                — Executive Officer  
 
**Committee constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024 vide Para No.833 of Bulletin Part-II dated 
26th September, 2024. 
* Shri Saket Gokhale  has been nominated vide Para No. 853 of Bulletin Part –II dated 03 rd 
October, 2024. 

Composition of the Standing  Committee on Communications and  
Information Technology (2025-26) 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
12. Shri Shafi Parambil 
13. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
14. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
15. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
16. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
17. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
18. Shri Devesh Shakya 
19. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
20. Shri Rajesh Verma 
21. Vacant 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
23. Shri Saket Gokhale 
24. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
27. Shri Kanad Purkayastha 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 26 th September, 202 5 vide Para No.3282  of Bulletin Part -II dated                  
01st October, 2025. 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communicat ions and Information 
Technology (2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee do present th is 
Twenty-second Report on the Subject ‘Review of mechanism to curb Fake News’ 
relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.  
2.  The Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology 
(2024-25) selected this subject for detailed examination and Report to the Parliament. 
The representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting briefed  the 
Committee on the subject on 21st November, 2024. On the same day, the Committee 
heard the views of the News Broadcasters and Digital Association (NBDA) and Editors 
Guild of India (EGI) . On 7 th May, 2025, the Committee heard the views of Hindustan 
Times, Indian Express, NDTV, News -18 Network and TV Today Network Ltd., as well 
as took evidence of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. The Committee also 
received written submissions/replies from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY),  Ministry of Communications 
(Department of Telecommunications ), Press Council of India (PCI) , NBDA, EGI,  
Hindustan Times, Indian Express, News-18 Network and TV Today Network Ltd. 
3.  The Comm ittee at their Sitting held on 9 th September, 2025  considered and 
adopted the Report.  
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of MIB, MeitY, 
DoT, PCI, NBDA, EGI, Hindustan Times, Indian Express, NDTV, News-18 Network and 
TV Today Network Ltd., for furnishing written information/views and/or for a ppearing 
before the Committee, which was of great help in the examination of the subject. 
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable 
assistance rendered by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee.                                                                 
6.  For facility of reference and convenience the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report. 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
       11 September, 2025  Chairperson, 
         20 Bhadra, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

1 
 
REPORT 
PART - I 
I. Introductory 
 
Digital communication technologies have witnessed tremendous growth across 
the world. Social and online media has enabled direct interaction between the 
Government and the citizens at an unimaginable scale and speed, thereby ensuring 
timely sharing of accurate information with the public. Today, all Ministries, Departments 
and organizations of the Government of India communicate directly with the citizens 
through social media. However, while contributing towards citizen empowerment and 
responsive governance, it has been observed that social media is also being misused 
by certain anti -social and anti -India actors for spreading rumours, fake news and false 
narratives.  
2. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) is the focal point for policy 
and regulatory matters related to the Print Media, Private Broadcasting through 
Television and Radio, and for news on Digital Media. The Information released by the 
Ministry and its various media units is considered to be authentic , official and credible. 
Journalists, while closely analyzing and scrutinizing the information released by the 
Ministry, trust such information to be authentic. Being a disseminator of information on 
one hand and the media regulator on the other hand, the people of India look towards 
the Ministry as having the critical responsibility to create and maintain the balance 
between the fundamental right to free speech and expression, including the freedom of 
press, and the need to counter false and harmful content across various media formats. 
3. In the last decade and a half, almost every individual has become a purveyor of 
news/information, and the conventional safeguards of editorial control have become 
non-existent. Consequently, there has been a massive proliferation of ‘Fake News’. 
‘Fake News’ and disinformation over the internet has emerged as a global challenge.  
4. Giving an overview about ‘Fake News’, one of the stakeholders  while deposing 
before the Committee, submitted as under:- 
“Fake news is not a new thing; it has always been there. But it was there in 
print, got magnified a little bit with the onset of electronic media, and then with 
the emergence of social media, I think it has become a huge problem now.  I 
think the unfortunate thing is that it is only going to become far more difficult 
for all of us. It is because the kind of technologies that are now available to 
make things look like real, whether these are audio transcripts or video files, 
are so sophisticated that it is go ing to be very, very difficult for someone who 
is removed from the situation to understand what is happening. And I think, 

2 
 
this is where two very essential aspects of how journalism is practiced 
become important. The first one is contextualization. You need to have 
experienced reporters who understand what is happening in a particular area, 
who know people. Two, you need to have reporters on the ground and 
reporters who are capable of calling up people and verifying things before 
putting that out. Increasingly, the problem that you see, especially in social 
media, and to a large extent, even in online media, is that you have desk 
jockeys who are sitting and typing based on what they are seeing on social 
media, without either contextualizing it or without calling up people and 
verifying it”. 
5. According to another stakeholder (Indian Express), there are two broad streams: 
mainstream media (newspapers, TV), digital news media; and user -generated content 
on social media (X, YouTube etc). Corporate media handles, IT cells of political parties; 
fact-checkers who check facts depending on how they vote; YouTubers; Insta Reels; 
bots, Al-driven algorithms, all can be sources of fake news. 
a) Fake News 
 
6. According to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, the term ‘Fake News’ 
is not defined under any statute. It is commonly understood as information which is false 
or misleading and presented as news. The journalistic ethics and standards guide news 
organizations and journalists in maintaining accuracy, fairness, and impartiality before 
dissemination of any information. 
7. As per Press Council of India (PCI), 'Fake News’ in general leads to spread of 
misinformation, disinformation that can result in defamation, public confusion and erode 
the credibility of media. On being asked about the definition of ‘Fake news’, PCI stated 
that they were not aware of any uniform definition for the same. However, according to 
the former Chairman, PCI, Fake News is defined as under:- 
“Fake news means news, story, information, data and reports which is or are 
wholly or partly false.   No prudent person should or can justify the 
dissemination of fake news. Fake news is a global menace and if any 
Government intends to take remedial steps to check its spread, per se, there 
is nothing wrong or obnoxious about it, provided that the authority to decide 
the truthfulness or otherwise of an allegation of fake news is entrusted to an 
independent statutory body like, the Press Council of India.  The complaint of 
fake news is registered as complaint by the Council. Such complaints are filed 
by an individual, the Government or any other aggrieved person and are dealt 
by the Council following the laid down procedure in the Press Council Act and 
Press Council (Procedure for Inquiry) Regulations, however, it is only in gross 
cases of fake news or repeated involvement in fake news dissemination that 
power to suspend or cancellation of accreditation of the journalists be 
resorted to. The allegations need to be determined by the Council before any 
action is called for”. 

3 
 
8. Following submissions have been made by some of the stakeholders  regarding 
the definition of ‘Fake News’:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Organisation/ 
Stakeholders 
Remarks/Suggestions with respect to definition of Fake 
News 
1.  Editors Guild 
of India (EGI) 
No universal definition exists.  
 
EGI recommends defining fake news as:  
Deliberately fabricated or manipulated content disseminated 
with the intent to mislead or harm. 
2.  News 
Broadcasters 
and Digital 
Association 
(NBDA) 
There is no clear and uniform definition of Fake News that is 
being followed by media/industry worldwide.  
 
Fake News is generally used to describe fabricated and 
factually inaccurate information. In fact, the term “fake news” is 
so ambiguous that it inaccurately subsumes within its fold 
“satire”, “opinions”, “criticism”, “clickbait reporting”, “biased 
reporting”, “motivated propaganda” etc. As understood, the 
term may also be used to target and delegitimize the media.   
Even internationally, there seems to be no consensus on the 
definition of ‘fake news’. A 2018 report by a group of 
independent High -level Group experts of the European 
Commission on the subject of “fake news and online 
disinformation” noted that the term fake news could be 
construed to include a “spectrum of information types”. 
Therefore, the polysemic nature of “fake news” makes defining 
and identifying fake news difficult.  
 
Since there cannot be established definitive principles to define 
‘fake’ news, it results in vagueness and makes it susceptible to 
grave abuse and misuse. In view of the above, fake news 
cannot be defined precisely and definitively. 
3.  Hindustan 
Times 
“There is no industry -wide definition of fake news. We would 
recommend a broad definition of fake news: False reports or 
Mis- or disinformation that could take the form of articles, 
photographs, video clips, which are disguised as real news, 
and which are aimed at fooling people or manipulating their 
opinion. The most important parameters in this are that these 
are ‘disguised as real news’ and are ‘aimed at fooling people or 
manipulating opinions’. This will ensure that honest mistakes 
do not attract the same penalty as fake news”. 
4.  T.V. Today 
Network 
Limited 
No industry-wide standard has been formulated on a strict and 
uniform definition of 'Fake News'. Fake News is usually 
synonymous and defined by the presence of hoax news, 
propaganda, bias, disinformation, naked assertion, click bait, 
deepfake etc.  
We propose following definition of the term ‘Fake News’ which 
is comprehensive and holistic:  
“Fake News" shall mean any false, misleading, or distorted 
information created, disseminated or amplified with the 
intention to deceive the public and meets all the following 

4 
 
criteria:  
a. It presents itself as containing factual assertions about 
events, individuals, entities, or phenomena excluding opinions, 
satire, or parody clearly identifiable as such; and  
b. The information has the capacity to significantly mislead a 
reasonable person, based on objective evidence or the lack 
thereof; and  
c. The dissemination of such information has the potential to 
cause harm, including but not limited to: (i) incitement to 
violence, hatred, or discrimination; (ii) disruption of public order 
or safety; (iii) undermining the integrity of democratic 
processes; (iv) causing significant harm to the reputation of 
individuals or entities; or (v) endangering public health.  
5.  Network-18 The term ‘fake news’  is typically used to describe information 
that is deliberately fabricated or factually incorrect. However, its 
usage has become so broad and imprecise that it often 
includes a variety of content such as satire, opinion pieces, 
criticism, clickbait, incorrect details, non -updated information, 
etc. Moreover, it is increasingly being wielded as a means to 
discredit and delegitimize the media. 
Hence, it is difficult to establish clear and definitive principles 
for defining "fake news," the term remains vague and open to 
significant abuse and misuse. Consequently, it is not possible 
to define fake news with precision or certainty. 
6.  Indian Express Its definition is crucial to any discussion on its regulation. 
Today, it is used to describe a staggering range of content in 
text, audio and video: content that is false; that has errors of 
fact; information that is unverified, be it health or financial 
"advice" by a non -expert, to a comment that denigrates the 
other side. It also includes news content where mistakes are 
made during the journalistic process; satire that exaggerates or 
uses falsehood as a narrative device; content created to 
deceive, mislead - either by humans or computer code, 
including Al-generated simulated videos. 
9. When asked about the parameters that could be considered while defining the 
term’ Fake News’, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting replied as under:- 
“While defining the term ‘fake news’, it can broadly be categorized in two 
categories- (1) that relating to the Government and (2) that relating to 
subjects not concerning Government. For fact-checking of information relating 
to the Government an FCU is presently operational under the Press 
Information Bureau.  For the monitoring and fact checking of information on 
subjects not relating to the Government , the media industry across platforms 
has to put in place a strict mechanism with emphasis on self-regulation.  
 
10. To the same query, the response of the  representative of Indian Express is as 
under:- 
Any mechanism, in the name of curbing "fake news," should be informed by 
this profound social transformation. Indeed, it should acknowledge key 

5 
 
elements of "fake news"; its nature and creation; its publication and sharing; 
its assessment by users and their action; and, in the end, user digital literacy. 
That's why it involves all of us in this room, including, and significantly, the 
distinguished MPs themselves. Additionally, those not in this room, the child; 
her parents and teachers; and, of course, technology companies who write 
the algorithms that decide and influence how news is shared”. 
 
 
11. Providing an overview about ‘Fake News’, NBDA during evidence stated that it 
has three parts and submitted the following:- 
“पहला  हहस्सा वह  फे क न्यूज़ ह ै, जि स के  बार े में टीवी न्यूज़ चैनल्स  को या िो  जिजिटल  प्ल ेटफॉर्मस स हैं, उनको, वहाां िो  फे क 
न्यूज़ होती है, उस के  जलए  जि र्ममेदार  ठहाराया  िाता  है। ये र ेगुल ेजटि चैनल्स  हैं। इन स बके  पास  एक स ेल्फ र ेगुल ेशन का 
मेके जनज्म है। ।……xxx…xxx…xxx इसकी  एक जललप  साइि  है। जललप  साइि  यह है जक एनबीिीएसए  के  अांदर  वही 
चैनल्स  आते हैं, िो  एनबीिीए के  मेंबस स हैं। अगर  जकसी  चैनल  के  जिलाफ  ज्यादा जशकायतें आई ां, उसको  एनबीिीएसए  ने 
पकड़ा, उसको  सिा  दी, तो वह हमारी  मेंबर जशप स े ररज़ाइन कर  देता है। उस के  बाद वह फ्री है। जफर  वह कु छ भी कर  सकता  
है, कु छ भी जदिा  सकता  है या कु छ भी काम कर  सकता  है, उस के  ऊपर  कोई र ेगुल ेशन नहीं है। यह प्रोस ेस  16 सालों स े चल  
रहा  है। 
फे क न्यूज़ का दूसरा पार्ट ह ै, ि हाां पर  कु छ लोग  िेजल ब्रेट तर ीके  स े जमस इनफॉमेशन फै ल ाते हैं। उस के  रीज़न्स पॉजलजटकल  हो 
स कते हैं, उस के  रीज़न्स सोशल  हो स कते हैं। आिकल  आप देि ेंगे जक अगर  जकसी  इल ाके  में अनर ेस्ट होता है, तो वहाां टीवी 
चैनल्स  बांद नहीं जकए ि ाते, अब इांटर नेट बांद जकया िाता  है। टीवी चैनल्स  बरकरार  र हते हैं। इांटर नेट क्यों बांद जकया िाता  है? 
क्योंजक ज्यादातर जमस इनफॉमेशन, ज्यादातर फे क न्यूज़ जिजिटल  मीजिया के  माध्यम स े फै ल ती है और  उसको  र ोकने के  
जलए  उन इलाकों में इांटर नेट को रोकना  पड़ता है। िो  टीवी चैनल्स  हैं, प्रॉिकास्टस स हैं, ब्रॉिकास्टस स के  िो  जिजिटल  फोरर्मस 
हैं, वे बाय-एांि-ल ािस स ेल्फ र ेगुल ेशन स े या इांजिपेंिेंट र ेगुल ेशन स े र ेगुल ेजटि हैं। ल ेजकन िो  उस के  तहत नहीं आते, उनके  ऊपर  
कोई र ेगुल ेशन नहीं है। उनमें ज्यादातर जिजिटल  मीजिया के  एररयाज़ हैं। ये िो  जिजिटल  प्ल ेटफॉर्मस स हैं, इनमें फे स बुक भी है, 
इनमें यू-ट्यूब भी है, इनमें ट्जवटर  और  िो  भी उस  तरह  के  प्ल ेटफॉर्मस स हैं, इनके  ऊपर  जकसी  का कोई कांट्रोल  नहीं है। 
…xxx….xxx….xxx……अब मैं इस के  तीस र े एस पैक्ट पर  आता ह ां, िो  जक स बस े गांभीर , स बस े सीररयस  है। 
पहली  बात मीजिया स े रर ल ेजटि है, मीजिया के  लोग  के पेबल  हैं, इनको हैंिल  कर  स कते हैं। दूस र ी बात पॉजलजटकल  लोगों स े, 
समाि  के  लोगों स े रर ल ेजटि है, वे भी हैंिल  कर  स कते हैं। ल ेजकन िब  बात कॉमन आदमी पर  आती है, उस  आम आदमी पर , 
जि स के  पास  इन स बस े ल ड़ने का रर स ोस स नहीं है। जिसको  प्रोटेक्शन देने की जि र्ममेदार ी पाजलसयामेंट की है, जिसको  प्रोटेक्शन 
देने की जि र्ममेदार ी सरकार  की है और  मीजिया की भी है। ये एआई कनवटेि वीजियोज़ हैं। मैं इसका  भुक्तभोगी ह ां, इसजलए  मैं 
आपको बहुत िीटेल  में बता सकता  ह ां, ल ेजकन मैं स ांक्षेप में दो-तीन बातें आपको बताऊांगा। एक वीजियो स कुस ल ेट हुआ, िो  जक 
मेर ा वीजियो है, उस में मैं िाइजबटीज़ की दवाई बेच रहा  ह ां। मुझे एक िगह  उस्ताद अमिद  अली  साहब  जमल े। मुझे इस  बात की 
िानकारी  नहीं थी ल ेजकन उन्होंने मुझे कहा जक आपके  पास  भगवान का जदया सब  कु छ है और  यह कहा जक आप शुगर  की 
दवाएां क्यों बेचते हैं। मैंने कहा जक वह मैं नहीं ह ां, एआई के  द्वारा जकया गया है। उन्होंने कहा जक ठीक है, ल ेजकन आपको यह नहीं 
करना  चाजहए। समाि  में एक बहुत बड़ा वगस है, जि स े यह बात समझ  नहीं आती है। िाक्टर नर ेश त्रेहन और  मेर े साथ  उनकी 
बातचीत है जि स में मैं उन्हें बता रहा  ह ां जक वेट कै स े कम कर ते हैं और  लोग  वे दवाएां िरीद  र हे हैं। हाल  ही में एक कांवस ेशन मेर े 
और  अजमताभ बच्चन साहब  के  बीच है। मैंने बहुत साल  पहल े उनका इांटर व्यू जकया था। इस  कांवस ेशन में मेर ा फे स  है, 
अजमताभ िी  का फे स  है और  मैं उनस े कह रहा  ह ां जक आपके  घुटने का ददस कै स ा है। वे कह र हे हैं जक मैं आठ साल  स े पर ेशान 
था। आपने िो  दवाई बताई – ‘वे दवाई का नाम बताते हैं’ मैंने उसका  इस्तेमाल  जकया और  मेर े घुटनों के  ददस में आराम  है। लोग  
भरोसा  कर ते हैं क्योंजक वे क्रे जिबल  फे स ेि  को देि ते हैं और  इस  तरह  की चीि ें स्प्रेि होती हैं।   
तीसरा आस्पेक्र् इंवेस्र्सट का ह ै। नारायण  मूजतस साहब  के  नाम स े एक जवजियो चल  रहा  है जि स में वे बताते हैं जक फल ाां 
कर्मपनी में इांवेस्ट करो , आपको पैस े िबल  हो ि ाएांगे। मुर्मबई में मेर ी भाभी ने मुझे फोन कर के  कहा जक नारायण  मूजतस वाला  
जवजियो मैंने देि ा है और  मैं इस में इांवेस्ट करना  चाहती ह ां। मैंने कहा जक यह फे क जवजियो है। उन्होंने कहा जक मैं तुमस े पैस ा 
नहीं माांगूगी। तुम जस फस  इतना बता दो जक इस में कै स े इांवेस्ट करना  है। इस के  बाद उन्होंने मुझे एक और  जवजियो भेि ा, जि स में 
मुके श अर्मबानी उसी  कर्मपनी को प्रमोट कर  र हे हैं। तीसरा  रतन  टाटा िी  भी उसी  इांवेस्टमेंट को प्रमोट कर  र हे हैं। मैंने उन्हें 
बहुत समझाया  जक यह फे क है और  उस के  बाद उन्होंने मुझे एक जवजियो भेि ा, जि स में मैं भी उसी  इांवेस्टमेंट को प्रमोट कर  
रहा  ह ां। आप देि ें जक इस में जकतने लोगों ने अपनी िीवन  भर  की कमाई लगा  दी और  उनका पैस ा गायब हो गया। कानून कहता 
है जक इस  तरह  का िो  फे क जवजियो, एआई ि ेनर ेटेि है, इस े 36 स े 42 घांटे के  अांदर  हटाना चाजहए ल ेजकन कोई नहीं हटाता 

6 
 
है। हम जचरियाां जल ि ते र हते हैं ल ेजकन कोई एक्शन नहीं होता है। यजद 15-20 जवजियो होती हैं तो उनमें स े दो या तीन जवजियो 
हटा देते हैं। ऐसी  जवजियोि  को जमजलयन  एांि जमजलयन व्यूि  जमल ते हैं। हमार े पास  उस े र ोकने का कोई तरीका  नहीं है। पुजल स  
के  पास  इन जवजियोि  के  जलए  जकसी  को पकड़ने का कोई मैके जनज्म नहीं है। हमने अपनी टीम बनाई। साइबर  एक्स पट्सस  को 
हायर  जकया। पता चला  जक ये ज्यादातर जवजियोि  ग्वाटेमाल ा स े ि ेनर ेट हो र हे हैं और  जकसी  तीसरी  कांट्री स े पोस्ट हो र हे हैं। 
आप उन्हें नहीं पकड़ स कते हैं। आप कोटस गए। कोटस ने कहा जक यह बहुत गांभीर  बात है, ल ेजकन हम क्या कर ें? मैंने जदल्ली हाई 
कोटस में जपजटशन फाइल  की है, जिसकी  जपछल े तीन महीने स े स ुनवाई हो रही  है और  इन तीन महीनों में न ि ाने जकतने 
जवजियोि  लोगों तक पहुांच गए। मुझे परसों ही िॉक्टर त्रेहन ने बताया जक उनके  और  मेर े जवजियोि  में िो  दवाई रर क्मेंि की गई 
है, वह िाकर  कई लोग  बीमार  हो गए हैं। उन्होंने कहा जक अब मैं भी हाई कोटस के  के स  में शाजमल  होना चाहता ह ां। िो 
िायजबटीि  आजद बीमाररयों की दूस र ी दवाएां हैं, उनस े लोगों को जकतना नुकस ान होगा, इसका  कोई अांदाि ा हमार े पास  नहीं 
है। जकसी  के  पैस े का नुकस ान होना, जकसी  के  स्वास््य का नुकस ान होना और  उसका  नुकस ान होना जि स के  पास  ल ड़ने का 
कोई साधन  नहीं है और  िो  कहीं िा  नहीं स कते हैं। नारायण  मूजतस, अजमताभ बच्चन और  रित  शमास के  फे स  पर  यकीन कर के  
इांवेस्टमेंट कर ते हैं, उन्हें पता नहीं होता जक एआई के  वे जशकार  हो र हे हैं। ये कहाां स े ि ेनर ेट होते हैं, मैंने आपको बताया है, 
ल ेजकन कोई िानकारी  प्राप्त नहीं होती है। कोई पाजकस्तान स े, ग्वाटेमाल ा स े, नाइिीररया  स े ि ेनर ेट होता है। जमस  इांफोमेशन स े 
थेलट, लूट, ब्ल ैकमेल, हेल्थ और  जसक्योररटी , लोगों कहाां र हते हैं, उन्हें कै स े पकड़ा िा  सकता  है, यह जवजियोि  उस के  गवाह 
हैं। मैंने पुजल स  वालों स े बात की। उन्होंने कहा जक 14 स े 15 साल  के  ल ड़के  हैं। वे गन के  साथ  अपनी जवजियो पोस्ट कर ते हैं, 
धमकी देते हैं और  पुजल स  कु छ नहीं कर  सकती  है क्योंजक वे माइनर  हैं। मेर े जहसाब  स े यह पूर े मामल े का स बस े सीररयस  
िायमेंशन है। माइनर  गन कल्चर के  साथ  लोगों को थ्रेट कर ें, ब्ल ैकमेल  कर ें, पैस ा लूटने की बात कर ें और  उस के  जलए  फे क 
जवजियोि  का इस्तेमाल । जिजिटल  अर ेस्ट होता है। पूर ा का पूर ा फे क पुजल स  स्टेशन जक्रएट कर  देते हैं और  स ीधे-स ाधे लोगों 
को जबल कु ल  पता नहीं चलता  है। तीन-तीन, चार -चार  जदन लोग  जिजिटली  अर ेस्ट र हते हैं। हमने बहुत जिटेल  में इांवेस्टीगेट 
जकया है और  कई के स ेि  को टीवी पर  जदिाया  भी है। 
b) Proliferation of Fake News and its causes 
 
12. Proliferation of ‘Fake News’ is a significant issue in today’s digital age. Several 
factors contribute to the spread of fake news, and it is challenging to quantify the exact 
volume being circulated daily due to the vastness of the internet. According to the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, below are the key causes of fake news 
proliferation:- 
i. Social Media Platforms: Social media platforms like Facebook, Twitter, 
and Instagram amplify content that garners engagement. Since 
sensational or emotionally charged content often generates more clicks, 
likes, and shares, these platforms' algorithms tend to prioritize such 
stories, which are sometimes fake or misleading. 
ii. Lack of Media Literacy:  Many individuals do not have the necessary 
skills to critically assess the information they encounter online. This can 
include difficulty in distinguishing between reliable and unreliable sources, 
or understanding how false information is crafted to appear credible. 
13. According to the Network-18, the main causes of fake news proliferation are:- 
“Proliferation of Fake News is basically the wide spread or increased 
circulation of false, misleading, or fabricated information, often presented as if 
it were true news. Spreading of fake news is driven by a variety of complex 
and interrelated factors which include but are not limited to political 
polarization, economic incentives, algorithms that promote viral and 
sensational content, technologies like bots that amplify false information, 
cognitive biases, manipulation through AI -generated deepfakes, and the 
widespread lack of media literacy of public are all significant contributors to 
this issue”.  

7 
 
14. According to the Editors Guild of India ( EGI), the main causes of fake news 
proliferation are:- 
i. Rapid dissemination of unverified information via social media 
platforms. 
ii. Algorithmic amplification of sensationalist or divisive content. 
iii. Lack of digital and media literacy. 
15. As per NBDA , the causes behind the proliferation of fake news are multifaceted 
and are driven by several key factors. Amongst these, political polarization, economy, 
algorithms, advertisements which reward viral and sensational content, technologies 
such as bots which amplify spread of fake news, cognitive biases, manipulation by 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) through deepfakes and lack of media literacy remain the main 
cause behind the proliferation of fake news. Some of the main causes of fake news 
proliferation are:- 
i. The Rise of Social Media: Social media platforms make it incredibly easy 
to share information (and misinformation) with a vast network with a 
single click. Algorithms often prioritize engagement, meaning sensational 
or controversial content, including fake news, can get amplified and 
reach a wider audience than factual reporting. Users tend to interact with 
like-minded individuals and content, creating echo chambers where fake 
news can circulate unchallenged. Filter bubbles further restrict the range 
of information people are exposed to, reinforcing existing biases.  
 
ii. Financial Incentives: Fake news , inter-alia, relies on sensational 
headlines, fabricated stories to attract clicks, which generate followers 
and advertising revenue for the creators.  
 
iii. Agendas: Some individuals or groups create and spread fake news to 
influence public opinion, damage political opponents, or advance specific 
agendas. This can be financially motivated through donations, support, 
or other forms of backing.  
 
iv. Psychological Factors: People are more likely to believe and share 
information that confirms their pre-existing beliefs, even if it is false. Fake 
news often targets strong emotions like anger, fear, or outrage, making 
people more likely to react and share without verifying the information.  
 
v. Technological Advancements: Technology is making it increasingly 
difficult to distinguish between real and fabricated content. Deepfakes 
(manipulated videos) and AI-generated text can create highly convincing 
but entirely false narratives. Further, bots and automated accounts on 
social media can be used to artificially inflate the reach of fake news, 
making it appear more popular and consequently, credible than it 
actually is.  
c) Challenges posed by ‘Fake News’ 
 
16. Some of the challenges posed by ‘Fake News’ , as submitted by  a few  
stakeholders, are as under:- 

8 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Organisation/
Stakeholders 
Remarks/Suggestions with respect to challenges posed 
by ‘Fake News’ 
1.  Press Council  
of India (PCI) 
 
Fake news in general leads to spread of misinformation, 
disinformation that can result in defamation, public confusion 
and erode the credibility of media. In order to address such 
matters, the Press Council of India has formulated the Norms 
of Journalistic Conduct to enlighten, encourage and guide 
media persons and aspiring journalist fraternity to value and 
practice ethical journalism by minimizing the amplification of 
fake news. The recent edition of Norms of Journalistic 
Conduct, 2022 is available on the Council’s website @ 
www.presscouncil.nic.in. The relevant norms herein are Pre -
Publication Verification (Norm 34); Conjecture, Comment and 
Fact (Norm 8) and Accuracy & Fairness (Norm 1); violating 
these norms culminates to spread of fake news. 
2.  Hindustan 
Times 
Fake news creates social and political problems. The main 
reasons for its proliferation is social media and intermediary 
platforms that enable its spread, and which have no 
accountability to facts. 
3. I Indian Express In a world that is driven by digital information, fake news, i.e., 
fake digital content, is a global challenge. The impact of false 
and manipulated information on individuals, societies, and 
government structures has been widely researched and 
documented. Many of these challenges apply to India as well.  
The problem of fake content and disinformation is closely 
connected with the development of digital media. The quick 
dissemination of information over the Internet creates unique 
and powerful vulnerabilities. 
The unprecedented increase in the volume of fake news, i.e., 
fake digital content, also has a direct correlation with the 
growth and spread of social media. All this is a concern for 
India, especially given our ongoing digital revolution and the 
proliferation of digital devices among citizens. 
In a polarised polity and society, from political players and 
their IT cells to activist groups and even anonymous voices, 
the clickbait advertising revenue model incentivises the 
propagation of fake digital content that is meant to inflame and 
provoke and/or mislead and harm.  
This becomes a natural home for fake news i.e. fake digital 
content as well. 
However, the robustness of our democracy and the wisdom 
that Indian voters have repeatedly shown in our elections 
suggest that this challenge need not be overstated, and it 
need not be assumed that citizens would passively allow 
themselves to be manipulated by disinformation or fake news.    
4.  T.V. Today 
Network 
Limited 
Fake News leads to loss of credibility of the news channels 
and the broadcasters. A common sensible person who is fed  
with fake information continuously would after a while not be 
able to differentiate between the real and fake news. It is sure 
to lead to credibility deficit as much as the news channels are 

9 
 
concerned and the ultimate such enormous financial loss 
would be the death knell for the mainstream media.  
Fake News can influence the sentiments of people, election 
process and polarise the society in addition to creating a 
broad wedge between the social segments rendering it difficult 
to enter into any positive dialogue. For corporates, it can be 
equally ruinous as the same may result in insider trading and 
fall in the stock market prices.  
False news if spread via social media can also trigger strong 
emotional reactions like fear, hate or anger and that makes it 
more difficult for a person to critically analyze such news.  
To the latter part of the question it is stated that the prime 
reason for the spread of fake news predominantly in India is 
the low level of digital literacy of the users. With more than 60 
Crores of online users, most of them lack the capacity to 
analyse information on the web. The same has been driven by 
affordable smartphones and data. Political agendas, 
communal prejudices and sensationalism are always a raging 
issue of the country and is further fuelled by social media 
algorithm that amplify the virality. 
5.  Network-18 Proliferation of Fake News is basically the  wide spread or 
increased circulation of false, misleading, or fabricated 
information, often presented as if it were true news. Spreading 
of fake news is driven by a variety of complex and interrelated 
factors which include but are not limited to political 
polarization, economic incentives, algorithms that promote 
viral and sensational content, technologies like bots that 
amplify false information, cognitive biases, manipulation 
through AI-generated deepfakes, and the widespread lack of 
media literacy of public are all significant contributors to this 
issue.  
 
 
d) Cases related to ‘Fake News’ 
 
17. When asked for the details of the cases of ‘Fake News’ handled by MIB in last 5 
years (in all the three forms of Media — Print, Electronics and Digital), the Ministry 
replied as under:- 
“It is reiterated that the term 'Fake News' is not explicitly defined under the 
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 and the Rules framed 
thereunder. However, Rule 6(1)(d) of the Programme Code under CTN 
Rules, 1994 provides that "No programme should be carried in cable 
service which contains anything obscene, defamatory, deliberate, false 
and suggestive innuendos and half truths. During last five years action 
was taken against broadcasters in 21 cases for violating Rule 6(1)(d) 
alongwith other provisions of Programme Code. 
The Government has notified the Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media, Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 on 25.02.2021 
which inter-alia provide for Code of Ethics for the publishers of news and 

10 
 
current affairs on digital media and publishers of online curated content 
(OTT platforms) along with a three -level institutional mechanism (Level -1 
to III) for redressal of grievances relating to violation of the Code of Ethics 
by such publishers. This division has taken appropriate action on such 
complaints as per the Grievance Redressal Mechanism under the Rules. 
PIB Fact Check Unit does not maintain data of fake news handles 
separately for each of the three platforms viz Print, Electronics, and 
Digital. However, it has received a total of 1,63,597 queries from 2 April 
2020 to 30 April 2025, out of which only 53,155 were found to be relevant 
and suitable action was taken thereon”. 
18. On being asked for the number of actionable queries that FCU responded to and 
number of fake news busted by it since its inception, following information was provided 
by MIB:- 
Year Number of 
actionable 
queries FCU has 
responded to 
Number of Fake News 
Busted on @PIB  Fact 
Check social media 
handles 
2019 13954 17 
2020 394 
2021 15412 285 
2022 8107 338 
2023 6623 557 
2024 6320 583 
2025* 2037 105 
Total 52,453 2279 
*As of 31 March 2025 
 
Social Media Statistics in respect of Fact Check Unit is as under: 
Platform Twitter(X) Instagram Facebook WhatsApp 
Channel 
Telegram Threads 
Followers 323.3 K 97.1 K 62 K 29.2 K 17K 15.4 K 
 
 
19. While observing a consistent decline in the number of actionable queries that 
FCU responded and increase in the number of queries busted on @PIBFactCheck 
social media handles , MIB was asked to provide reasons for the same. To this, the 
Ministry replied as under:- 
“The PIB Fact Check Unit (FCU), since its establishment, has played a vital 
role in countering misinformation related to Government policies and events. 
A significant surge in the number of queries began in 2019, coinciding with 
the global outbreak of COVID -19. The pandemic triggered an overwhelming 
wave of misinformation, resulting in a spike in fact -check requests. Public 
reliance on verified Government communication led to an unprecedented 
volume of queries during 2020–21. 

11 
 
In the years since, while the total number of queries has gradually declined, 
the number of actionable cases has steadily increased, indicating that citizens 
are now better at identifying and reporting more credible instances of 
misinformation. This also indicates more awareness about the PIB Fact 
Check Unit as a credible and potent source for fighting fake news.  
Public awareness has evolved, not reduced: 
The initial surge in queries during the pandemic was driven by widespread 
uncertainty and panic. It can be a safe assumption that since then, public 
digital literacy has improved, and citizens have become more discerning 
about what constitutes misinformation. As a result, fewer false claims may be 
reaching the threshold that prompts reporting. This is also displayed in the 
rising following of fact -check unit on all platforms and wide publicity given to 
the fact checks by various news items. 
 
Trust in the PIB Fact Check Unit remains intact: 
The increase in actionable queries suggests that the public is submitting more 
relevant and verifiable cases, indicating continued engagement and trust in 
the PIB Fact Check Unit’s role. 
Despite a drop in total queries, the increase in fake news items busted 
reflects improved detection capabilities rather than a simple rise in 
misinformation alone. Several factors contribute to this:  
• Enhanced Monitoring: The PIB Fact Check has strengthened its 
surveillance, allowing it to proactively identify and address fake 
news without relying solely on public queries. 
• Better Targeting: The Unit is now more effective at 
distinguishing actionable cases, resulting in more high -impact 
busts.” 
The nature and volume of queries addressed by the FCU are inherently 
dynamic, influenced by the socio -political and public health environments at 
any given time. The sharp rise in fake news items "busted" by PIB Fact 
Check, from 2021 to 2024, despite a drop in citizen queries, suggests a 
combination of two key trends.  
First, increased awareness about the PIB Fact Check Unit and its usefulness 
in public information hygiene and a better understanding of its ambit. This has 
caused more relevant cases to be reported.  
Second, this increase also reflects improved detection mechanisms by PIB. 
The fact -checking unit has become more proactive, often taking suo -motu 
action by targeting entire YouTube channels and viral content without waiting 
for citizen queries. Therefore, the rise in busts is both a response to the 
growing awareness about misinformation and a result of enhanced 
institutional efforts to combat it”. 
 
20. When asked to furnish details of the action taken against the cases that were 
labelled as ‘Fake News’, particularly that were dealt during the year 2024, the Ministry 
replied as under:- 
“The PIB Fact Check Unit currently does not possess enforcement powers 
to take action against fake news. Its role is primarily limited to creating 
public awareness by identifying and flagging false or misleading 
information circulating on social media platforms. Therefore, after verifying 
the authenticity of news from authorized sources in Ministries/ 

12 
 
Departments, FCU posts correct information on its social media 
platforms”. 
(i) Print Media 
 
21. In furtherance of its objectives, Press Council of India ( PCI), under Section 
13(2)(b) of the Press Council Act, 1978, has framed 'Norms of Journalistic Conduct' for 
adherence by the media for maintaining ethical standards in print media journalism and 
for journalists to practice the profession within ethical boundaries. These Norms have 
specific provisions relating to curbing of spread of fake news under its norms relating to 
‘Accuracy and fairness ’. Under Section 13 of the Press Council Act 1978, PCI also 
takes cognizance on complaints in matters on the issues concerning freedom of Press 
and safeguarding of its high standards. Under Section 14 of the PCI Act, complaints 
violative of the ethical norms of journalism are adjudicated. The details of the cases filed 
and adjudicated under Section -13 and Section -14 of the PCI Act for the last 3 years is 
as under:- 
 
Under Section-13 
Sl. No. Year Cases Filed Cases 
Adjudicated 
Suo-Motu 
Cases 
1. 2022-23 273 11 4 
2. 2023-24 212 63 7 
3. 2024-25 210 46 9 
 
Under Section-14 
Sl. No. Year Cases Filed Cases 
Adjudicated 
Suo-Motu 
Cases 
1. 2022-23 865 29 4 
2. 2023-24 775 103 24 
3. 2024-25 898 41 21 
22. According to Press Council of India (PCI) during the last 3 years, they have taken 
suo-motu cognizance in 5 matters pertaining to fake news. Further, the data of 
complaints related to fake news filed and adjudicated in last three (3) years is as 
follows. PCI has stated that as the Council has no punitive powers, no record of 
compliance by media organisations is being maintained by the Press Council of India.  
Sl. 
No. 
Year Cases filed u/s 14 Cases Disposed Of  
Total 
filed 
Relating 
to Fake 
News 
By way of 
Adjudication 
Cases closed at 
Preliminary Stage 
(u/s 14)  Relating to 

13 
 
23. The Ministry was asked whether the cause for discrepancy between the number 
of cases filed and the number actually adjudicated was due to staff shortage/procedural 
delay/resource constraints. To this, the reply was as under:- 
“There is no significant staff shortage in relation to sanctioned strength or 
resource constraints. However, it is apprised that the number of complaints 
mentioned are the registered complaints. Of these, a number of complaints 
are closed at preliminary stage by the Hon’ble Chairperson and do not figure 
in the list of cases adjudicated. 
It is further apprised that on receipt of the complaint(s), the Council processes 
the same as per the complaint mechanism and procedures laid down in the 
Press Council Act, 1978. 
A brief upon the prescribed procedure is as follows:- 
(a) Complaint is registered under the relevant section(s) i.e U/s 13 
(Complaints by the Press) and 14 (Complaints against the Press) of Press 
Council Act, 1978. The Complainant is required to comply with mandatory 
requirements under Regulation (3) of Press Council (Procedure for Inquiry) 
Regulation, 1979 within four (4) weeks. 
In the absence of any reply, the matter is reviewed and a reminder is issued 
to the complainant asking him again to comply with the requirements within 2 
(two) weeks. 
If the communication has not been responded by the complainant; then a final 
reminder may be issued to the complainant for compliance on case -to-case 
basis. 
Where a complainant does not comply with the requirements of Regulation 
(3), the Chairman may return the complaint under registered post 
acknowledgement due informing the complainant that the matter has been 
closed due to lack of compliance. 
(b) The complaint may also be closed at preliminary stage due to following 
reasons: 
(i) Upon analysing the complaint(s) at initial stage, if the matter is beyond the 
jurisdiction of the Council i.e. Digital/ Electronic/Social  Media/Personal 
Dispute/Law & Order etc., the same is closed by Hon’ble Chairperson at 
preliminary stage and reported to the Council. 
ii. If the matter is sub -judice in any court of law, the Council does not take 
cognizance and closes the same. 
iii. If the complaint is received beyond the time limit (time barred) as per the 
Procedure for Inquiry Regulations, 1979, the matter is closed by Hon’ble 
Chairperson. However, the Hon’ble Chairman/Chairperson has discretionary 
power to condone the delay after considering the request of the complainant 
and case may be processed. 
(iv) Complaints are also closed for lack of substance. 
(c)Upon completion of all the mandatory requirements, a Show Cause 
Notice/Notice for Comments/Notice for Statement in reply is issued to the 
concerned respondent(s). 
Total Fake News Including Fake News 
1.  2022-2023 865 233 29 03 693 
2.  2023-2024 775 273 103 02 765 
3.  2024-2025 903 371 41 23 424 

14 
 
On receipt of the replies/written statement/counter comment (s), the same is 
shared with parties i.e. complainant and respondents. 
(d)After ascertaining that the record is complete in all respects, the matter 
becomes ripe and is listed chronologically before the Inquiry Committee of the 
Council. 
As per the procedure, as and when the meeting of Inquiry Committee is fixed 
an agenda of cases (list of cases) is prepared for listing before the Inquiry 
Committee. The list is prepared chronologically year -wise. However, the 
Council gives priority to the cases where it took Suo -motu cognizance 
regarding cases of curtailment of Press Freedom/assault or killing of a 
journalist/breach of journalistic norms of conduct. 
(e)Proceedings of Inquiry Committee are open to public wherein the parties 
concerned are issued with notice for hearing, seeking their appearance on an 
appointed date, time, and venue through notice for hearings. 
(f)The Council’s complaint resolution mechanism closely parallels the 
operational methodology of Indian judicial courts. The Council’s 
adjudicatory/disposal process requires meticulous examination of facts, 
evidence, and legal precedents. 
(g)Cases that are listed for hearing may get adjourned for various reasons, on 
case-to-case basis as deemed fit by the Inquiry Committee, such as 
adjournment sought by either of the parties, pendency of response of either of 
the parties, implementation of certain measures. 
Inquiry Committee also calls the reports from the concerned 
authorities/parties along with supporting documents, if any required to render 
the justice on record. It also passes directions in ongoing matters for 
compliance and adjourns the matter for ensuring the compliance by the 
parties. 
(h) The Inquiry Committee after conducting hearing give its report which is 
then placed before the Council in its next meeting for its final decision. The 
powers of the Council are limited to warn, admonish and at the most censure. 
The Council by convention is headed by a Retd. Judge of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India and it comprises of twenty-eight other members. 
The decision of the Council is forwarded to the concerned parties in the 
matter for follow up/information/compliance. 
(i) It is apprised that during COVID Pandemic regular meetings of the Council 
could not be held. Last meeting of the Council was held on 10.02.2020 and 
the last meeting of Inquiry Committee was held on 25 & 26 February, 2020 
during pandemic. Thereafter, meeting of the Council was held on 21 & 22 
September, 2020 (Physically and virtually). 
It is also apprised that in May, 2021 the term of 13 th Press Council of India 
ended. The new Council i.e. 14 th term was constituted on 05.10.2021. 
However, the term of the Chairman also ended on 21.11.2021. 
The position of the Hon'ble Chairperson, Press Council of India was vacant 
from 21.11.2021 to 16.06.2022, due to which no meeting took place. 
Presently, the re-constitution of the XVth term Council is under way. 14th term 
ended on October 5, 2024. 
This has resulted in a backlog of cases”. 
 
24. According to PCI, to deal with the cases of fake news, the PCI has a complaint 
mechanism. Further, under Clause 14(2) of the Press Council Act, 1978, if the Council 

15 
 
is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, it may 
require any newspaper to publish therein such manner as the Council thinks fit, any 
particulars relating to any inquiry under this section against a newspaper or news 
agency, an editor or a journalist working therein, including the name of such newspaper, 
news agency, editor or journalist.   
25. When asked to provide details of the plan/proposal to reduce backlog, the 
Ministry replied as under:- 
(i) Prioritization for cases marked important by Honb’le Chairperson 
(ii) Categorizing backlog items 
(iii) Regular updation and review of complaints under process 
(iv) More frequent Inquiry Committee meetings to hear cases 
(v) Minimise adjournments of Inquiry Committee hearings and ratification 
meetings of Council. 
(vi) Determining time limit to clear the pendency. 
26. With respect to adjudicating system, the Ministry stated that its efficiency may be 
enhanced by following steps:- 
(i) Time limit between filing of complaint and matter becoming ripe for 
adjudication to be not more than 4 (four) months. 
(ii) Listing the matter before the Inquiry Committee by prioritizing them 
through date / year on which the complaint is filed, in chronological 
manner. 
(iii) In order to clear the backlog, frequency of Inquiry Committee meetings 
has been increased. Each inquiry Committee meeting for at least three 
days on monthly basis and takes up minimum 20 cases per day. 
(iv) The Inquiry Committees to submit reports within 3(three) months. 
(v) Outstation meetings of Inquiry Committee are also already being 
conducted keeping in view number of cases from a particular region. 
(vi) Recommendation of the Inquiry Committee in each complaint case is 
being immediately listed before the Council in its next meeting for 
ratification. Then the adjudication is forwarded to the parties concerned 
promptly and uploaded on Council’s website. 
27. For increasing the transparency in the disposal of complaints, the Ministry/PCI 
stated that following steps are being taken by the Council:- 
(i) Updating monthly statistics on official website of the Council. 
(ii) Complainant is updated about the developments of the matter through 
email, letter and telephonically. 
(iii) For maintaining the transparency, the Council conducts public meetings 
of the Inquiry Committees. 
(iv) Website of the Council is updated with the decisions and adjudications of 
the Council. 
(v) Proper information to the parties concerned regarding their matter is 

16 
 
being issued time to time, meticulously by the Council. 
(vi) Agendas of the Inquiry Committees, are being uploaded over the website 
of the Council, time to time for facilitating the parties and maintaining 
transparency. 
(vii) A complaint mechanism software with online submission and tracking 
facility is being developed. 
(viii) Implementation of e -office in PCI is under process, having electronic file 
tracking system. 
(ii) Electronic Media 
28. All Private satellite TV Channels are required to adhere to the Programme Code 
under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995, in respect of their news 
content which inter alia provides that no contents which contains anything obscene, 
defamatory, deliberate, false and suggestive innuendos and half -truths is broadcast. 
The Cable Television Network Rules, 1994, as amended in 2021, provides for a three -
tier grievance redressal mechanism to look into the complaints relating to the violation 
of the Programme Code by the TV channels. Appropriate action is taken where violation 
of Programme Code is found. The Central Government also issues Advisories to the TV 
Channels from time to time for adherence to the Programme Code.  Year -wise details 
regarding action taken on matter against Pvt. Satellite TV Channels during 2019 -2025 
(Till 29.04.2025) is as under:- 
Sl. 
No Description 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
 
2024 
 
2025 
 
Total 
1. Advisories to specific 
channels 
29 01 05 07 14 03 1 60 
2. Warnings 39 04 25 06 17 01 - 92 
3. Orders for Apology 
Scrolls 
30 - 11 39 05 - - 83 
4. Off-air Orders 03 02 - - 03 - - 8 
5. Cancellation of 
permission 
- - 01 - - - - 1 
6. Order for disclaimer - - 01 - - - - 1 
Total 101 07 43 52 37 04 01 245 
(iii) Digital Media 
 
29. For digital news publishers, the Government has notified the Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 under 
Information Technology Act, 2000 on 25th February, 2021, which inter-alia provides for a 
Code of Ethics for adherence by digital news publishers and also a three -tier 
mechanism for redressal of grievance relating to Code of Ethics by them.  The Code of 
Ethics applicable to the publishers of news and current affairs obligates such publishers 
to follow the following norms applicable to conventional news media i.e. Print and TV:  

17 
 
(i) Norms of Journalistic Conduct of the Press Council of India under the Press 
Council Act, 1978; 
(ii) Programme Code under section 5 of the Cable Television Networks 
Regulation) Act, 1995; 
(iii) Content which is prohibited under any law for the time being in force shall not 
be published or transmitted. 
30. Besides, Section 69A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 inter-alia 
empowers the Central Government to issue directions to any Government agency or an 
intermediary to block content in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of India, defence 
of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or public order or for 
preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence relating to such 
matters. Under the provisions of Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and 
Digital Media  Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 the Ministry issues directions for blocking of 
content of digital news publishers covered under the provisions of Section 69 A of 
Information Technology Act, 2000.  The request for blocking is considered as per the 
laid procedure in the IT Rules, 2021.  After Notification of the Information Technology 
(Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 on 25.02.2021, 15 
Writ Petitions have been filed in various High Courts challenging the maintainability of 
the Rules. Hon’ble Supreme Court vide order dated 22.03.2024 transferred all 15 Writ 
Petitions to Delhi High Court for further hearing. Presently, these petitions are heard by 
Delhi High Court. In two of these cases filed in Bombay High court in WP(L) NO.14172 
of 2021 - Agij Promotion of Nineteen one a Media Pvt. Ltd. &Ors. vs. Union of India and 
PIL (L) No.14204 of 2021 - Nikhil Mangesh Wagle vs. Union of India, Hon’ble Bombay 
High Court vide interim order dated 14.08.2021 has stayed the operation of Rule 9(1) 
relating to the adherence of the Code of Ethics by the publishers of news and current 
affairs on digital media and OTT platforms; and Rule 9(3) relating to the three -level 
grievance redressal mechanism. SLPs has been filed  in Supreme Court against this 
interim order. 
31. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting was asked to provide their view 
point on the judgement of a three -judge bench of the Bombay High Court which set 
aside Rule 3(1)(b)(v) of  ‘Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital 
Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021’  (as amended in 2023) that granted the power to a 
Central Government -appointed authority to determine that which is "fake", "false" or 
"misleading", and upon such determination, the social media intermediaries were 

18 
 
required to take action to "not host, display, upload, modify, publish, transmit, store, 
update or share. To this, they replied as under:- 
“Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (Meit Y) amended  rule 
3(1)(b)(v) of IT Rules, 2021  vide notification dated 6 th April, 2023 the IT 
Rules, 2021 to provide that the intermediary shall make reasonable efforts by 
itself, and to cause the users of its computer resource to not host, display, 
upload, modify, publish, transmit, store, update or share any information that 
deceives or misleads the addressee about the origin of the message or 
knowingly and intentionally communicates any misinformation or information 
which is patently false and untrue or misleading in nature or, in respect of any 
business of the Central Government, is identified as fake or false or 
misleading by such Fact Check Unit of the Central Government as the 
Ministry may, by notification published in the Official Gazette, specify.  
The Bombay High Court, vide Order dated 26.09.2024, declared the 
amendment unconstitutional on grounds that  it is violative of the provisions of 
Article 14, Article 19(1)(a) and Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution and the said 
Rule as amended is ultra vires the Act of 2000. 
It may be noted in this regard that Press Information Bureau (PIB) under 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting is the nodal agency of the 
Government to disseminate information to the print, electronic and digital 
media on Government policies, programmes, initiatives and achievements 
both at central and regional levels. Given this situation the FCU in PIB seems 
to be the most appropriate agency for fact checking of false and misleading 
information relating to the Government. The Government feels that giving a 
statutory basis to the FCU under PIB, as proposed in the amendments to IT 
Rules, 2021 as above is necessary for checking fake new s relating to its 
plans, programmes and initiatives. Accordingly, MeiTY is in the process of 
filing an SLP against the judgment of Bombay High Court”. 
32. In the light of the above and considering the role of the Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology (MeitY) in implementing ‘IT Rules, 2021’ a series of queries 
related to the subject were asked, which inter-alia included (i) Details of the legal 
provisions that currently empower MeitY to regulate or take action against the 
dissemination of ‘Fake News’; (ii) Details of engagement between MeitY and social 
media as well as  messaging platforms such as Facebook, WhatsApp, X (formerly 
Twitter), YouTube,  etc., aimed to prevent  misinformation/Fake News;  (iii) 
Views/suggestions on ‘Safe Harbour’ provisions used by social media 
platforms/intermediaries etc.; (iv) Views on the role of Digital platforms and algorithms 
involved in promoting ‘Fake News;  (v) Further action on the judgement of a three -judge 

19 
 
bench of the Bombay High Court which set aside Rule 3(1)(b)(v) of the IT Rules 2021 
(as amended in 2023) ; (vi)  Suggestions for making Online Media more accountable; 
(vii) Existing coordination mechanisms between MeitY and other concerned Ministries 
for addressing the issue of ‘Fake News’; etc. The response of MeitY is as under:- 
“As per entries 22A, 22B and 22C in the subjects distributed to the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting (MIB) in the Second Schedule to the 
Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, the following 
matters are allocated to MIB: 
"VA. DIGITAL/ONLINE MEDIA 
22A Films and Audio -Visual programmes/ content made available by online 
content providers/ publishers. 
22B News and current affairs content on online platforms. 
22C Online advertisements." 
(iii) Part III of the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital 
Media Ethics  Code) Rules, 2021 (“IT Rules, 2021”), focus ses on regulating 
digital news publishers and OTT  platforms and this Part III is being 
administered by MIB. 
(iv) A Fact Check Unit (FCU) has been set up under Press Information 
Bureau, MIB in November, 2019 with the objective to counter dissemination of 
fake news & misinformation pertaining to the Government of India”. 
33. The Department of Telecommunications  was also asked to furnish details of the 
legal provisions that currently empower DoT to regulate or take action against the 
dissemination of ‘Fake News’; and about the existing coordination mechanisms between 
DoT and other concerned Ministries for addressing the issue of ‘Fake News’; etc. To 
this the Department of Telecommunications replied as under:- 
“Department of Telecommunications (DOT) issues instructions to Licensees 
having Internet Service Authorization to block/unblock access to the 
website(s), in the capacity of licensor, as per directions received from Ministry 
of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) and Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting (MIB) under Section 69A of IT Act, 2000 and as per 
directions from the Hon'ble Courts in various Commercial Suits/Writ 
Petitions”. 
34. On the role and coordination required with other Ministries/Organisations viz. 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT), Election Commission of India (ECI), etc., for checking the 
menace of Fake News, the Ministry  of Information and Broadcasting  submitted as 
under:- 
“The Ministry is in support of developing a broader roadmap to curtail and 
control the spread of fake news or misinformation with involvement of MeitY, 
DoT etc. This needs to be done in broader consultation with stakeholders 
from the industry as well. 
The use of advanced tool like Artificial Intelligence (AI) can be useful in 
consultation with Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) 

20 
 
while tackling the spread of fake news. Such tools may be used for 
monitoring/verification of news etc. by the self -regulatory bodies and media 
organizations to leverage their scope and capacity. 
Further, including media literacy as a part of formal education curriculum 
could be considered but a broader consultation in this regard need to be done 
by the Ministry of Education and other stakeholders".  
 
II. Measures/Provisions/Mechanism to Curb Fake News 
 
(d) Regulatory framework for curbing Fake News 
 
35. When asked to outline the procedure and specific Rule followed by Print Media, 
Electronic Media and Digital Media in identifying and curbing the Fake News, the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  replied that the  Government of India has 
statutory and institutional mechanisms in place to address fake news on various media 
platforms which are as under:- 
“A Fact Check Unit (FCU)  has been set up under Press Information 
Bureau under the  Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in November, 
2019 to counter fake news relating to  the Central Government. After 
verifying the authenticity of news from authorised sources in  Ministries/ 
Departments, FCU posts correct information on its social media platforms. 
For Print Media, the newspapers have to adhere to “Norms of Journalistic 
Conduct” brought out by Press Council of India (PCI) which inter alia 
restrains publication of fake/defamatory/ misleading news. The Council 
holds inquiry into alleged violations of Norms, as per section 14 of the Act, 
and may warn, admonish or censure the newspaper, editors, journalists, 
etc. as the case may be. 
Content on TV Channels  is required to adhere to the Programme Code 
under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995, which, inter 
alia, provides that no content which contains anything obscene, 
defamatory, deliberate, false and suggestive innuendos and half -truth is 
broadcast on private satellite TV channels. The Cable Television Network  
(Amendment) Rules 2021, provides for a three -tier grievance redressal 
mechanism to look into the complaints relating to the violation of the Code 
by the TV channels. Appropriate action is taken where violation of 
Programme Code is found. 
For Digital News Publishers,  Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021(“IT Rules, 2021”) 
provide for a Code of Ethics for the publishers of news and current affairs 
on digital media, which, inter alia, requires adherence to the Norms of 
Journalistic Conduct brought out by PCI and the Programme Code   under 
Cable Television Network Regulation Act, 1995. The Rules provide for a 
Three Tier Grievance Redressal Mechanism   to look into complaints 
relating to viola tion of the Code. The Code of Ethics under IT Rules, 
however, has been stayed by the Bombay High Court vide their interim 
order dated 14.8.2021.  The complaints relating to fake news received in 

21 
 
the Ministry are forwarded to the concerned news publishers, being Level -
I of the Grievance Redressal Mechanism, for appropriate action under the 
IT Rules, 2021.  
The Ministry takes appropriate action against circulation of fake news as 
per the provisions of the institutional mechanism as above, available for 
various media platforms. However, to augment the effectiveness of the 
efforts to check the spread of fake news there is a need for defining fake 
news and incorporating it in the existing regulatory mechanisms for print, 
electronic and digital media along with appropriate deterrent measures for 
such circulation of fake news. This is especially important for the news 
publishers on digital media as well as the users of social media platforms 
keeping in view the speed of spread of such news on digital/social media". 
36. The Ministry also informed that t he objective of the Fact Check Unit is to counter 
dissemination of fake news & misinformation pertaining to the Government of India and 
to provide people with an easy avenue to report suspicious and questionable 
information for fact -checking in this regard. Further, the details of the fact checking 
process adopted by the FCU  was available on the website  of the Press Information 
Bureau according to which they follow a FACT model – Find, Assess, Create and 
Target. 
“Find: The PIB Fact Check Unit takes Suo Moto cognizance on Fact 
Checking as well as receives complaints on its website or Whatsapp Hotline.  
Assess: The Unit segregates the received information after ascertaining 
whether it falls within the ambit of the Fact Check Unit. The relevant 
complaints are researched using various fact checking tools and verified 
through authentic government open -source information available only on 
Government websites, notices, circulars, documents, and e-gazettes. 
Create: After verifying the authenticity of the received information from 
authorized sources, the Fact Check Unit utilizes the Information, Education & 
Communication (IEC) strategy to create awareness through creative content 
fit for dissemination on social media platforms. 
Target: The PIB Fact Check Unit posts the content on its various social 
media platforms. Additionally, content may be reposted from other verified 
Government handles that have fact checked any information pertaining to 
Government of India. No personal handles will be reposted. 
37. The representatives of the Ministry while deposing before the Committee , during 
evidence, submitted the following w.r.t Fact Check Unit:- 
“As regards the Fact-Check Unit that we have established in the Press 
Information Bureau, I am using the word Press Information Bureau because 
currently the fact-check unit established under Government of India has been 
stayed by the hon. High Court . Under the Fact-Check Unit that we have 
established under the PIB, we have been doing a lot of fact -checking work. In 
fact, currently also our war -room is working round the clock as well as every 
second to ensure that a lot of fact -checking is done on misinformation that is 
being peddled by the inimical forces”. 

22 
 
38. Pointing out the regulatory gaps with respect to the fake information and 
misinformation, the Ministry submitted the following during evidence:- 
 “We have the Press Council Act of 1978 in respect of newspapers. We have 
the Cable Television Networks Regulation Act 1995 for television channels. 
We also have the Press and Registration of Periodicals Act 2023. We have 
the Information Technology Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Code Rules 2021 for digital news publishers. 
There are regulatory frameworks in place for curbing fake news but as has 
been pointed out by the Committee in their earlier meetings, there are 
regulatory gaps currently and especially with respect to the fake information 
and misinformation that gets peddled on digital platforms”.  
39. On enquiring about the efforts made in identifying and curbing the Fake News, 
PCI submitted following:- 
“The Press Council of India is a quasi –judicial statutory authority established 
under an Act of Parliament with the twin objectives of maintaining the 
standards of journalism and preserving the freedom of press in India. The PCI 
has a complaint mechanism for dealing with the cases of 
fake/false/defamatory/misleading news wherein it takes suo -motu cognizance 
under Regulation 13 of Press Council (Procedure for Inquiry) Regulation, 
1979, or under Clause 14(1) of the Press Council Act, 1978, on receipt of a 
complaint made to it or otherwise, if the Council has reason to believe that a 
newspaper or news agency has offended against the standards of journalistic 
ethics or public taste or that an editor or a working journalist has committed 
any professional misconduct, the Council, after giving the newspaper, or 
news agency, the editor or journalist concerned an opportunity of being 
heard, holds an inquiry in such manner as provided by regulations made 
under this Act and, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, it may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, warn, admonish or censure the newspaper, 
the news agency, the editor or the journalist or disapprove the conduct of the 
editor or the journalist, as the case may be. ..xxx..xxx…xxx…  As far as the 
Press Council of India is concerned, it has jurisdiction only over print media 
and for the print media, the Council has formulated the Norms of Journalistic 
Conduct to enlighten, encourage and guide media persons and aspiring 
media workers to value and practice ethical journalism, with its recent edition 
being the Norms of Journalistic Conduct, 2022. Therein, the relevant norms in 
the matter of fake news are Norm 1 – Accuracy & Fairness; Norm 8 – 
Conjecture, Comment and Fact; and Norm 34 – Pre–Publication Verification. 
Further, Article 19(2) of the Indian Constitution places reasonable restrictions 
on the Right to freedom of speech and expression in the interests of 
sovereignty and integrity of the country, security of the State, friendly relations 
with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or in relation to 
contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence.” 
40. Adding further on the issue, following was submitted by the PCI:- 
“The PCI while considering the matter regarding strategies and efforts to 
tackle fake news during its meeting held on 22.09.2022, gave 6 
recommendations, one among them related to fact checking mechanism 

23 
 
which reads - ‘There should be “Fact Checking mechanism” within the news 
media organization itself before publishing any news article’.  
Further, the PCI while dealing with reference from Shri Kuldip Nayar 
regarding setting up of Media Commission as forwarded by the Ministry of 
Information & Broadcasting on 15.02.2006, after in -depth deliberation 
supported the terms of reference envisaged by Shri Nayar alongwith 
additional suggestion, that to promote credibility and response to readers’ 
reactions the institution of internal Ombudsmen may be strengthened/created 
in big newspapers. Newspapers with a minimum circulation (say 1 lakh per 
issue) may be required to appoint an Independent Ombudsmen”.  
41. Following response was given by NBDA, during evidence, for tackling issues 
related to Fake News:- 
“अब सवाल  यह है जक इस स े जनपटने के  जलए  क्या कर ें और  इस के  जलए हमने हाई कोटस में क्या स ुझाव जदए। इांटर नेट 
प्लेटफार्मस स के  पास  िेजिके टेि नोिल  आजफसर  होना चाजहए, जि स े कोई एकाउांटेबल बना स के । जि स स े आप बात 
कर  स कें। दूस र ा इस  स ार े मैके जनज्म में एकदम एक्शन होना चाजहए और  छह घांटे में उस  जवजियो को जिलीट  कर ें और  
उस के  बाद ि ाांच कर ें। पहले इांवेस्टीगेशन कर ें और  जफर  जिलीट  कर ें, तो उसका  नुकस ान बहुत ज्यादा होता है। एक 
स ुझाव यह है जक एआई ि ेनर ेट कर ने वाले लोगों को लाइस ेंस  जदया िाए  और  उस  लाइस ेंस  की टर्मस स एांि कांजिशन्स  
जस्ट्रांि ेंट हों ताजक वे इस  तरह  की जवजियो ि ेनर ेट कर के  जकसी  को पाजलजटकली , पस सनली, फाइनेंजशयली और  
जसक्योररटी  वाइि  नुकस ान न पहुांचा स के । फाइनली मैं कहना चाहता ह ां जक इस े हम के वल इांजिया के  स ांबांध में न 
देि ें। It is a global problem world-over. हम ि हाां भी ि ाते हैं everywhere people are facing this. हमने 
अमरीका  के  इलेक्शन्स  में देि ा है। दोनों तरफ  के  कांजििेट्स  की तरफ  स े फे क जवजियोि  पोस्ट हुए। पूर े जसस्टम  को 
प्रभाजवत कर ने की कोजशश की गई। काांटेन्ट बनाने वाले ग्लोबल स र फे स  स े ऑपर ेट कर ते हैं, फाइनेंजशयली फ्राि 
कर ने वाले भी ग्लोबली ऑपर ेट कर ते हैं और  िो  अपराध  कर ते हैं, वे भी ग्लोबली ऑपर ेट कर ते हैं, इसजलए  िब  हम 
कानून की बात स ोचें तो यह स ोचें जक ग्लोबल प्रॉब्लम है और  िो  भी स्टैंि हम लें, उस में दूस र े देशों को साथ  में लेना 
होगा। भारत  इस में इजनजशएजटव लेकर  शुरू आत कर  सकता  है लेजकन िब  तक दूस र े मुल्क भी इस में शाजमल  नहीं 
होंगे, तब तक इस के  बार े में फाइनली  कु छ कर  पाना स ांभव नहीं होगा। धन्यवाद।”। 
42. Regarding the procedure and specific Rules followed by Print Media, Electronic 
Media, and Digital Media in identifying and curbing Fake News, following was submitted 
by Editors Guild of India (EGI):- 
“Print: It is part of a well -established norms laid out drill to check and cross -
verify every piece of information and satisfy its veracity. Then there are 
multiple layers of inbuilt vetting and gatekeeper mechanisms in each print 
organization. Any news, emanating from any medium is subjected to rigorous 
tests by cross -checking the development from the person (s) and or 
authorities (s) before deciding on its authenticity. Information that fails to pass 
the benchmarks is discarded as unconfirmed and inaccurate. Further, the 
print media is covered under the ambit of the Press Council of India, which is 
a quasi -judicial body with a clearly spelled -out code called ‘Norms of 
Journalists Conduct’. The Council advises the press to follow these norms. 
Broadcast: Besides the in -house fact -checking processes that each news 
broadcaster follows, the industry association of news broadcasters —News 
Broadcasters & Digital Association (NBDA) —has established the News 
Broadcasters & Digital Standards Authority (NBDSA), an independent body 
that regulates news broadcasting in India. The NBDSA enforces the NBDA’s 

24 
 
Code of Ethics & Broadcasting Standards, adjudicates complaints about 
broadcasts, and ensures compliance with the Code of Conduct.  
Digital Media:  The digital editions of print publications as well as news 
broadcasters follow the same journalistic norms of editoria l checks and fact -
checking that  are followed by them for print editions and for linear TV 
broadcasts respectively”. 
43. On the same issue, Editors Guild of India (EGI) during evidence submitted that: 
“The simple point being that there are already quite a few mechanisms across 
criminal and civil space, across IT Act to control any kind of content. Being 
the kind of democracy that we profess ourselves to be, we, as a GUILD, 
would like to lay down some first principles that any content regulation or any 
content monitoring should be in a way that it is not coercive and it is not 
Government control and where Government is the sole arbiter. The 
Government has put together a Fact-Checking Unit, the PIB run fact-checking 
unit. Per se the Fact-Checking Unit is a welcome step. It is important to check 
content, flag content, but where you give the same Fact-Checking Unit an 
authority to take down content, it becomes problematic. The recent Bombay 
High Court judgment has been very emphatic about the unconstitutionality of 
the Fact-Checking Unit with powers to order content take down primarily 
because the Government was the only arbiter, sole arbiter, about what is 
fake, what is misleading, or what is false. So, whatever mechanism that we 
think about should be in a manner where the Government is at best flagging 
content, Government is not taking on the onus of bringing down content. The 
Government should work with media industry, platforms, media players, to 
create an enabling mechanism where content remains safe for the public at 
large. Mr. Sharma has elaborated on the need for platforms to take greater 
responsibility. The GUILD wholeheartedly supports that suggestion. These 
platforms are making billions and billions of dollars of profits. The amount of 
money that they are investing in flagging content, in monitoring content is 
visibly very small, and miniscule. They need to put in far more effort, far more 
money, far more resources in scanning the online system and flagging 
problematic content. Again, we reiterate the word ‘flagging’. They already 
have their own guidelines where they take down content on obscenity, child 
pornography and depiction of violence and they often take down. Our 
submission is that on the matter of fake news, content takedown has to be 
discouraged. Content flagging has to be the rule in a manner that you also 
explain why the content is false. I agree with Mr. Sharma that the response 
time has to be very quick. But the response time should not be mistaken for 
taking down of the content because then that also becomes a censorship 
power. Whilst we would not want the Government to be a censor, we would 
also not want the private entity to be a censor.  
Especially, in the kind of democracy that we all want ourselves to be, the first 
and foremost recommendation is to create a far greater onus on platforms to 
devote money, energy, and resources, and  have people who are 
accountable, who are approachable for any kind of grievances a user may 
have. This also applies to any blocking order, because many times blocking 
orders are issued and the person whose content has been blocked does not 
get any response. Why has their content been removed? It is like speaking 
into a black hole because you do not understand. You do not get a response. 
He (Mr. Sharma) is very right that on YouTube, they do not get a response. 

25 
 
So, whether you want to flag a content as wrong or whether your content has 
been pulled down, in both cases, transparency by the platforms has to be 
maintained. They have enough money. We all see the amount of profit they 
are generating. They need to put in far more money towards creating this 
mechanism”.  
 
44. Adding on the issue, EGI during evidence, submitted as under:- 
“Finally, I think our recommendation will be that the Government should 
rethink some other laws that have been introduced because in an effort to 
solve a problem, which we understand is a genuine problem, the system has 
become extremely cumbersome. We should also recognize that in the end, 
governments come and change. Tools made by one government are misused 
by another government. So, we should not create systems which will be 
misused. This is our submission because there is a diverse group of 
parliamentarians here, not only at the national level but also at the state level, 
like the Central Government was putting in a Fact-Checking Unit ; the 
Karnataka Government was putting in a Fact-Checking Unit. Our problem is 
that this is not something which is endemic to one establishment. The history 
of 80 years has been that the State has taken on greater onus. That is 
probably the intention of the State in other parts of the world also. In many 
democracies, in an excitement to control such content, they have created a 
censorship mechanism. Again, I am just reiterating that there should be 
transparency at the Government’s level, transparency in detailing what is 
fake, transparency at the end of platforms for flagging content, more 
resources by the platforms for flagging content. Government is only to create 
an enabling mechanism, if at all by other bodies. Government should not be a 
part of any regulatory content monitoring mechanism. Already there is a very 
elaborate system. In fact, there is an urgent need to rethink 353 BNS and 
urgent need to re -evaluate Section 69 where take -down orders are being 
issued in a very opaque manner”.  
45. Regarding the initiative s taken by States/UTs to counter Fake 
News/Misinformation, following was submitted by EGI:- 
“Certain States and Union Territories in India have implemented innovative 
initiatives to counter misinformation and fake news: 
Maharashtra: 
Launched the "MahaCyber" initiative to tackle online misinformation. Citizens 
can report fake news through a dedicated helpline number and online portal. 
Karnataka: 
Established a fact -checking team under the State Police’s Cybercrime 
Division to monitor and address misinformation, particularly during elections 
and public health crises. 
Kerala: 
Initiated the "Satyameva Jayate" campaign to educate the public about fake 
news and promote media literacy through workshops and public awareness 
drives”. 
46. Following was submitted by the representative of NDTV, during evidence, with 
respect to laws related to ‘Fake News’:- 

26 
 
“मेरा आखिरी पॉइंट सिम्पल है। भारत में पर्ााप्त क ान ून  हैं। अगर उन्हें इफ े क्टटव ढंग िे ल ागू ककर्ा 
जाए तो कोई  इंडिवव जुअल  ककिी  प्लेटफॉमा पर ऐिी बात  कहता  है, जो समि इंफॉमेशन  की  कैटेगरी में 
आता है तो हम उिको  ित्म कर  िकते  हैं और उिके  उपार् िजा िे लेकर  टलेररकफकेशन  तक  हैं। 
उिमें िब  क ुछ हो िकता  है, िीफ े मेशन तक  हो िकता  है।  
िरकार इि पर क ुछ न  करे , र्हां तक  कक  जो एफिीओ बना  है, उिको  ऑलरेिी मुम्ब ई हाइकोटा ने  
ननरस्त कर  दिर्ा है। उि पर रोक  लगा  िी है। इिमें िेल्फ रेगुल ेशन  ही िबिे  अच्छा और 
िम्मानजनक तरीका  हो िकता  है। हम लोगों  के  पाि एक  मैकेननज्म है। जब  सशकार्तें आती हैं तो 
एक  िमर् में हमें उनका  िमाधान  करना  पड़ता है। एनबीिीएिए  को  बताना  पड़ता है और हम उििे 
बंधे  हुए हैं। अच्छी बात  र्ह है कक  ज्र्ािातर जो बड़े  िंस्थान हैं, क्जनको हम मैन  स्रीम मीडिर्ा कहते  
हैं, वे  उनका  पालन  भी करते  हैं, लेककन  वहां  पर भी एक  िमस्र्ा है कक  ककिी  ने  एक  बड़ी  गलती  की , 
उि पर एक  छोटी िी माफी मांग ली  और वे  ननकल  गए। हम पॉसलदटकल  र्ा आइडिर्ोलॉक्जकल बातों  
को  छोड़ िें...xxx...xxx हम उि एग्जाम्पल को  लेते  हैं। अगर उि दिन हमारा एनबीिीएिए , आप लोगों  
के  कहने  पर नहीं , बक्ल्क अपने  आप र्ह कहता  है र्ह ब हुत गलत  हुआ है और प्रॉसमनेंट्ली माफी मांगी 
जाए तो क्जि दिन मुझे पूरे दिन टॉप हेिर में लगाकर  कहना  पड़ेगा कक  आज हमने  र्ह गलती  की  
और इि िबर के  सलए  मैं माफी मांगता हूूँ तो जो मेरी क्रेडिबबसलटी की  कोस्ट है, मेरी शसमिंिगी की , जो 
पक्ललक शेम की  कोस्ट है, वह  ब हुत ज्र्ािा है। सिफा रेगुल ेशन  के  जररए अगर हम इन  चीजों को  
अचीव  करते  हैं तो हम पक्ललक कन्विेशन  को  बड़े  पैमाने  पर इंफ्ल ुएंि कर  िकते  हैं। जहां तक  
इंडिवव जुअल  कक्रएटिा का  िवाल  है, जहां तक  िोशल  मीडिर्ा प्लेटफॉम्िा को  रेगुल ेट करने  का  िवाल  है, 
इि बारे में मुझे लगता  है कक  र्ह ब हुत कदिन  कार्ा है, लेककन  भारत क्जि जगह पर िड़ा है, चूूँकक  
अब  िुनन र्ा बिल  गई है, उिमें भारत का  राजनीनतक  न ेतृत्व  मजब ूती िे जो क ान ून  वह  भारत के  
िंगिनों  पर एप्लाई करता  है, अगर वही  क ान ून  उि पर एप्लाई करेगा  तो र्ह िमस्र्ा ब हुत तेजी िे 
ित्म की  जा िकती  है”। 
 
47. With respect to tools used by organisation to proactively identify and curb the 
spread of misinformation, following were submitted by different stakeholders:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Organisation/ 
Stakeholders 
Remarks/Suggestions with respect to tools used by 
organisation to proactively identify and curb the spread 
of misinformation/‘Fake News’ 
1.  Hindustan 
Times 
We use the same simple fact checking tools most 
newsrooms use. 
2.  T.V. Today 
Network 
Limited 
Our Organisation use s tools such as Google Images to find 
visually similar images online, Google Fact check explorers 
as well as data bases maintained by International Fact 
Checking Network are also resorted to. We are also using AI 
tools to identify and verify the authenticity of any piece 
before its publication. 
3.  PCI The PCI has a complaint mechanism for dealing with the 
cases of fake/false/defamatory/misleading news wherein it 
takes suo -motu cognizance under Regulation 13 of Press 
Council (Procedure for Inquiry) Regulation, 1979, or under 
Clause 14(1) of the Press Council Act, 1978, on receipt of a 
complaint made to it or otherwise, if the Council has reason 
to believe that a newspaper or news agency has offended 
against the standards of journalistic ethics or public taste or 
that an editor or a working journalist has committed any 

27 
 
professional misconduct, the Council, after giving the 
newspaper, or news agency, the editor or journalist 
concerned an opportunity of being heard, holds an inquiry in 
such manner as provided by regulations made under this Act 
and, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, it may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, warn, admonish or 
censure the newspaper, the news agency, the editor or the 
journalist or disapprove the conduct of the editor or the 
journalist, as the case may be. 
 
48. Details were sought with respect to the organisations (apart from Fact Check 
Unit) that are involved in monitoring Fake  News and related issues. To this NBDA 
stated that t here are several organisations involved in monitoring Fake News  which 
include independent fact -checkers and fact -check organisations, that are set up as a 
collaboration between industry stakeholders. They also stated that apart from 
independent Fact Checkers and Fact -check organisations, several media organisations 
have also set up their own Fact Check Units.  On the same issue, Editors Guild of India 
submitted as under:- 
“Apart from the Fact Check Unit of the Press Information Bureau (PIB), 
several other organizations are actively involved in monitoring fake news and 
related issues in India. These include both independent organizations and 
collaborative initiatives with digital platforms, fact -checking agencies, and 
media organizations”. 
49. Responding to a query related to the capacity of an organisation to handle the 
volume of Fake News circulated daily, NBDA submitted as under:-  
“It is NBDA’s opinion that no single organization, government or private, 
would have the capacity to handle the volume of fake news, whether in the 
present or future. A collaboration between all the stakeholders, including the 
independent self-regulatory bodies and Fact Checkers, is the most effective 
method of controlling the proliferation of fake news.  
The issue with respect to volume of fake news is not as relevant in the 
context of organized media (e.g., Print, News Broadcasters and Online News 
Publishers) in view of the existence of regulatory oversight. The issue is more 
relevant from the perspective of dissemination of fake information online 
through unconventional media sources / providers. As such, it is submitted 
that the issue ought to be addressed through voluntary industry -led 
independent-self-regulatory bodies and can be supplemented by the Courts.  
In so far as, news broadcasters are concerned, they have permission to 
uplink and downlink from the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting and are 
bound by its comprehensive framework, which is designed to promote ethical 
journalism and accurate reporting. The potential adverse consequence of 
losing credibility, acts as a strong deterrent against the deliberate 
dissemination of fake news for organized media. Further, industry bodies like 
the NBDA have established their own Code of Conduct and self -regulatory 

28 
 
mechanisms, adding another layer of accountability and promoting adherence 
to journalistic standards.  
Reputable news organizations, especially those operating within the regulated 
framework, have a vested interest in maintaining their credibility and public 
trust. This leads them to invest in robust fact -checking processes. They 
typically have established editorial workflows that include rigorous verification 
procedures, often involving multiple independent sources to corroborate 
information before it's published or broadcast. Many larger media houses 
even dedicate resources to in -house fact -checking teams or desks, whose 
primary responsibility is to scrutinize information for accuracy and 
authenticity, further reducing the likelihood of inadvertently spreading fake 
news.  
Journalists employed by established media organizations are typically trained 
in the core principles and ethics of journalism. This training emphasizes 
accuracy, objectivity, neutrality, fairness, and the importance of source 
verification. The professional practice involves diligently vetting sources, 
seeking corroboration from multiple independent sources, and attributing 
information accurately. This commitment to journalistic standards, instilled 
through formal education and reinforced by organizational culture, creates a 
professional environment that inherently discourages the careless or 
intentional spread of fake information. 
Traditional media outlets operate under the constant gaze of public scrutiny. 
They are more likely to be held accountable by their audience for any 
inaccuracies or misleading information they disseminate. This awareness of 
audience feedback and the potential for public backlash incentivizes accuracy 
and responsible reporting. Moreover, the competitive nature of the media 
landscape plays a crucial role. Media houses are constantly striving to 
maintain their audience share and protect their reputation as reliable sources 
of news. This competitive pressure reinforces the importance of accurate and 
credible reporting, as any lapse in journalistic integrity can lead to a loss of 
audience trust and market share, further mitigating the risk of fake news 
gaining traction within these established organizations.  
The best place to curb fake news is at the publisher level. That is where the 
organisation’s internal policies and guidelines (being in conformity with the 
self-regulatory bodies such as NBDSA) assumes pivotal role. Hence, the self -
regulatory mechanism ensures that the fake news is not further circulated and 
curbed in the first place”. 
50. When asked about the adequacy of the existing legislative provisions and 
mechanisms to tackle the menace of Fake News, the Ministry  provided details of the 
provisions for Print, Electronic and Digital Media and submitted as under:-  
“The Ministry takes appropriate action against circulation of fake news as per 
the provisions of the institutional mechanism as above, available for various 
media platforms.  However, to augment the effectiveness of the efforts to 
check the spread of fake news there is a need for defining fake news and 
incorporating it in the existing regulatory mechanisms for print, electronic and 
digital media along with appropriate deterrent measures for such circulation of 
fake news. This is especially important for the news publishers on digital 
media as well as the users of social media platforms keeping in view the 
speed of spread of such news on digital/social media”. 

29 
 
51. With respect to the same issue, following has been submitted by PCI:- 
“Though its not specific to fake news but Article 19(2) of the Indian 
Constitution allows for reasonable restrictions on the freedom of speech 
and expression, which is guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a).  These 
restrictions are permissible in the interests of national security, sovereignty 
and integrity of the country, security of the State, friendly relations with 
foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt 
of court, defamation or incitement to an offence.  
Further, the Council has formulated Norms of Journalistic Conduct. 
Additionally, the Press Council of India in its submission dated 17.02.2025 
before the Standing Committee on Communication and Information 
Technology on the subject ‘Review of implementation of Laws related to 
all forms of Media’ has proposed the following amendment to the Press 
Council Act, 1978 which can help prevent the dissemination of 
fake/false/misleading news.  
Chapter III : POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL 
CHANGES IN “POWER TO CENSURE ”– 
To ADD Four New Provisos To Section 14(2) : 
(i) Provided that compliance with such directions shall be mandatory and 
binding upon the newspaper/periodical/news agency concerned. 
(ii) Provided that in the event of non - compliance with the direction under 
this Section within the period specified, the Council may censure the 
newspaper/periodicals/ journalist concerned and/or direct the 
authorities of the State, for suspension of registration/stop release of 
advertisement to it till the gist of adjudication is published/ for the 
period specified by the Council.  
(iii) Provided that on the award of two censures under this Section within 
a period of six months the Council may if it deems fit, ask the 
concerned authorities to suspend the registration of  
newspaper/periodical/news agency/ suspend the release of 
Government funded advertisement/ in case of editor or journalist, 
suspension of accreditation for a period not exceeding three months. 
(iv) Directions of the Council should be complied by the authorities within 
a period of 15 days and action taken report may be filed before the 
PCI. 
Reason for proposed amendment: Amendment to take care 
of cases of non -compliance of the decisions and directions of 
the Council”. 
 
52. Views of some of the stakeholders with respect to adequacy  of the existing 
legislative provisions and mechanisms to tackle the challenges posed by ‘Fake News’ 
are as under:-  
 

30 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Organisation/
Stakeholders 
Remarks/Suggestions with respect to adequacy of the 
existing legislative provisions and mechanisms to tackle 
the menace of ‘Fake News’ 
1.  MIB  The Government of India has statutory and institutional 
mechanisms in place to address fake news, on various media 
platforms. (Details are already provided in Para No. 35 of this 
Report) 
2.  Editors Guild 
of India (EGI) 
Existing laws like the IT Act, the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995, are 
sufficient but face challenges such as: 
Ambiguity in definitions of fake news. 
The subjectivity of interpretation by the concerned authority 
and misuse of these laws by widespread and liberal use 
against content that is anti -establishment. This is especially 
concerning in the case of the use of criminal laws, as many 
provisions of erstwhile IPC (124A, 153 A and B, 295A, 298, 
502, and 505), have been liberally used to file FIRs against 
journalists whose reporting has been critical of governing 
establishment. Now BNS has added to these laws, Section 
353 (criminalizing misinformation), which also lends to 
subjective interpretation. 
Opaqueness in the use of the relevant provisions, often 
against principles of natural justice. Inconsistent enforcement 
practices. 
Stricter laws risk misuse for political suppression and could 
undermine free speech. Emphasis should be on 
strengthening self -regulation and enhancing existing 
enforcement mechanisms. 
 
3.  T.V. Today 
Network 
Limited 
The existing provisions for regulation of spread of fake/false 
news, as laid above, are sufficient to safeguard the interest of 
general public qua consumption of accurate news and 
information. However, the extent, the pace, and the language 
in which fake news is spreading, along with the low digital 
literacy and increasing content generation through AI, tend to 
outpace these efforts. Since fake news continues to 
proliferate faster on social media, enhanced technologies and 
AI solutions may be employed to identify fake news; 
collaboration with independent fact -checking organizations 
can be formalized in order to ensure better enforcement of 
the existing legal and regulatory framework to curb the 
spread of fake news.  
Further, there is a strong case for enacting stricter laws 
against the creators of fake news in India, but such measures 
should be carefully designed to balance the need for 
regulation and the freedom of speech and expression as 
guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a). For distributors – there is 
adequate regulation for dissemination and regulation of news 
– however, the enforcement of the same can be streamlined 
to reduce the volume of fake news by providing digital literacy 

31 
 
to general public. 
4.  Hindustan 
Times 
Yes and no.  
Yes in terms of assigning responsibility and accountability to 
media. No because intermediaries, content providers and 
social media platforms are not covered by the law. 
5.  Indian 
Express  
Yes, there already exist adequate laws, rules and regulations, 
courts and statutory bodies which regulate news and editorial 
appearing in print media. 
6.  Network-18 Given the powerful role journalism plays in shaping public 
discourse, industry bodies like the News Broadcasters & 
Digital Association (NBDA) have proactively instituted a self -
regulatory framework. This includes a comprehensive Code 
of Ethics and Broadcasting Standards aimed at maintaining 
the highest standards of journalistic conduct. Core values 
such as accuracy, impartiality, neutrality, and objectivity form 
the foundation of this framework. The NBDA's Code of 
Conduct—which encompasses ethical codes, detailed 
guidelines, and periodic advisories —seeks to promote 
consistency and responsibility in news reporting among its 
member organizations. This Code and grievance redressal 
procedures are easily accessible on its official website, 
promoting transparency and enabling stakeholders to follow 
its guidelines with clarity and ease. 
Beyond self -regulation, various statutory provisions exist to 
address and deter the dissemination of fake or misleading 
news by both electronic and digital media outlets. Notably, 
Section 5 of the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 
1995, read with Rule 6(1)(d) of the 1994 Rules, prohibits 
telecasting content that is obscene, defamatory, false, or 
suggestive of half-truths or innuendos. 
In the digital space, the Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 apply 
to online news publishers.  
Moreover, the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (BNS) applies 
uniformly across media types —print, electronic, and digital —
and includes key sections that address false or harmful 
information: 
• Section 175: Penalizes false statements during elections 
• Section 197(1)(d): Prohibits content damaging national 
integration 
• Section 212: Targets dissemination of incorrect 
information 
• Section 353: Addresses content that could incite public 
disorder 
In addition, other legislative instruments further support the 
fight against fake news and misinformation: 
• Representation of the People Act, 1951 (Section 123(4)) 
• Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (Section 53) 
• Disaster Management Act, 2005 (Section 54) 
• Consumer Protection Act, 2019: Regulates false or 

32 
 
misleading claims in advertisements and deceptive pricing 
tactics 
• Contempt of Courts Act, 1971: Prevents media reporting 
that may interfere with legal proceedings or lower public 
confidence in the judiciary 
• ASCI Guidelines: Govern truthful advertising and prevent 
misleading promotion 
In conclusion, we strongly believe that self -regulation is the 
most appropriate and efficient model for ensuring ethical 
journalism in a democratic society. To enhance its 
effectiveness, it may be beneficial to mandate participation in 
self-regulatory frameworks for all media entities, thereby 
fostering uniform adherence to high journalistic standards 
and a collective commitment to curbing fake news. 
 
53. When PCI was asked to share their views on the need for effective mechanism to 
address the menace of Fake News, they replied as under:- 
“Regarding the need for effective mechanism to address the menace of ‘Fake 
News’, the Former Chairman, PCI in his press note dated 03.04.2018 titled 
‘Response of Chairman on Fake News’, defined fake news as ‘news, story, 
information, data, and reports which is or are wholly or partly false.’ He further 
stated that ‘No prudent person should or can justify the dissemination of fake 
news. Fake news is a global menace and if any Government intends to take 
remedial steps to check its spread, per se, there is nothing wrong or 
obnoxious about it, provided that the authority to decide the truthfulness or 
otherwise of an allegation of fake news is entrusted to an independent 
statutory body like the Press Council of India.’ He further stated the procedure 
how the complaints are dealt with at the PCI, which reads as ‘The complaint 
of fake news is registered as complaint by the Council. Such complaints are 
filed by the individual, the Government or any other aggrieved person and are 
dealt by the Council following the laid down procedure in the Press Council 
Act and Press Council (Procedure for Inquiry) Regulations. However, it is only 
in gross cases of fake news or repeated involvement in fake news 
dissemination that power to suspend or cancellation of accreditation of the 
journalists be resorted to. The allegation needs to be determined by the 
Council before any action is called for. 
Further, the Council made few recommendations in the matter of Strategies 
and efforts to tackle fake news which are as under: 
a. There must be single organization specially to tackle the issue of fake 
news.  
b. There should be “Fact Checking mechanism” within the news media 
organization itself before publishing any news article.  
c. To create awareness among the Media Community concerning 
repercussion of publication of fake news.  
d. Fake news disseminated on electronic platform may be brought under 
the purview of the Press Council of India until formation of the Media 
Council. 

33 
 
e. To implement mechanism to identify the generation/source point of fake 
news. 
f. Recommendation may also be forwarded to the Ministry of Education for 
inclusion of media studies in academic curriculum”.  
 
54. On the need for amending the existing Acts/Rules/Guidelines related to Print 
Media for tackling the issue of ‘Fake News’, PCI replied as under:- 
“Yes, there is a need for amending the existing Acts/Rules/Guidelines related 
to Print Media for tackling the issue of ‘Fake News’, to ensure compliance.  
The Press Council of India had proposed various amendments to the Press 
Council Act, 1978 before the Standing Committee on Communication s and 
Information Technology on the subject ‘Review of implementation of Laws 
related to all forms of Media’  “[The relevant suggestion may be referred in 
Para 51 of this Report]”. 
 
55. On being asked whether there should be changes in the Press Council of India 
(PCI) Act, 1978, the Ministry replied as under:- 
“The provisions of the Press Council Act and Rules made thereunder are 
reviewed from time to time and appropriate amendments /subordinate 
legislations are made for better implementation of the provisions of the Act to 
carry out its objectives”.  
 
56. On being asked whether stricter law was needed against the creator and 
distributors of Fake News, MIB submitted as under:- 
“The Government of India has various statutory and institutional mechanisms 
in place to address the complaints relating to violation of Codes and Norms 
already existing for various media platforms viz. print media, electronic media 
and digital media. Besides the provisions under the laws pertaining to these 
media, certain new provisions in the recently enacted Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023 (Section 353) seek to address the issue of fake news from a 
criminal point of view. …xxxx…xxxx…xxxx. 
To augment the effectiveness of the efforts to check the spread of fake news 
there is a need for defining fake news and incorporating it in the existing 
regulatory mechanisms for print, electronic and digital media alongwith 
appropriate deterrent measures for such circulation of fake news. This is 
especially important for the news publishers on digital media as well as the 
users of social media platforms keeping in view the speed of spread of such 
news on digital/social media.  
However, bringing in a new law to address the specific problem of fake news 
or amendments in the existing laws applicable to different media platforms 
needs broader consultation and consensus building taking into account the 
provisions relating to the freedom of speech and expression in the 
Constitution”. 
57. Responding to a query as to whether there  should be a centralized body to 
monitor the menace of Fake News or not, the Ministry replied as:-  

34 
 
“The problem of fake news can best be addressed by the media through a 
self-regulatory mechanism. As a general policy Government does not 
interfere with reporting of news across media and hence it may not be 
appropriate to have a direct role for the Government in monitoring of fake 
news as it simply means monitoring of all news. It is felt that the monitoring of 
fake news can best be addressed by the self regulatory mechanism of the 
industry stakeholders.   
However, to augment the effectiveness of the efforts to check the spread of 
fake news there is a need for defining fake news and incorporating it in the 
existing regulatory mechanisms for print, electronic and digital media along 
with appropriate deterrent measures for such circulation of fake news. This is 
especially important for the news publishers on digital media as well as the 
users of social media platforms keeping in view the speed of spread of such 
news on digital/social media”.  
 
58. Suggestions of MIB for having a well synchronized ecosystem to curb the 
menace of ‘Fake News’ in an effective way are as under:- 
“The existing statutory and institutional mechanisms can be strengthened to 
address fake news, across media platforms by involving technology and AI to 
flag potentially fake news/ misleading content as a secondary layer of 
monitoring. The Digital Media being the primary source of fake news/ 
misinformation the social media intermediaries should be consulted before an 
effective mechanism could be developed to curb the menace of fake news. 
The Ministry is of the view that the menace of fake news can best be 
addressed by the media through a self -regulatory mechanism. Media literacy 
through public awareness campaigns can prove as an effective means to 
prevent the spread of fake news and sensitize citizens against sharing of 
unverified information. 
The existing regulatory framework has different statutes for different media 
verticals such as the Press Council Act, 1978 for print media, Cable 
Television Network Regulation Act, 1995 for electronic media and Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 
2021 for news publishers on digital media as each platform is unique and 
distinctive in its own way”.  
  
59. Responding to the same query, PCI submitted as under:-  
“To make the Media more accountable w.r.t publishing Fake News/content, 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and its departments namely, 
Central Bureau of Communication and Press Registrar General of India may 
consider taking stringent action in the matter”. 
60. When asked to provide suggestions for making Media more accountable w.r.t 
Fake News/content, the Ministry replied as under:-  
“It is felt that the monitoring of fake news can be addressed by the self -
regulatory mechanism of the industry stakeholders. Investing in media literacy 
initiatives empowers audiences to critically assess information, reducing the 
spread of misinformation. Media can put in place effective fact -checking 
measures by verifying content before dissemination of information while also 
providing readers with accessible sources for verification while avoiding 

35 
 
sensationalism and adhering to the good practices of ethical journalism 
prescribed in the norms of journalistic conduct by the Press Council of India”. 
 
61. On the issue of Self Regulation, MIB during evidence, submitted as under:-  
“We are more interested in self-regulation. As Sir mentioned, in the Cable and 
Television Act, there is a clear-cut provision for self-regulatory bodies. As self-
regulatory bodies, there are people who can register. We have two 
organizations which have registered under this Act. For members who are not 
part of any of these self-regulatory bodies, we have a provision in the Ministry 
called inter-departmental committee or IDC. There is a three -tier mechanism. 
First, we refer any complaint to the concerned channel. The channel has to 
respond. If the complainant is not happy with the response of the channel, he 
or she can go to the self -regulatory body. In case the channel is not part of 
any self -regulatory body, then the complaint is referred to the IDC. This is 
working really well in the Cable and Television Act. The only issue is that for 
members who are not part of self -regulatory bodies, the complainant can 
reach the IDC and there is clear -cut process. It is not an arbitrary process. 
The complainant and the concerned channel are called. There is complete 
hearing before the IDC”. 
(b) Self Regulatory Mechanism and Fake News  
 
62. The total number of TV channels permitted by MIB, as on 30.11.2024, is 919. 
Further, following two bodies have been registered at Level -II as Self Regulating Bodies 
by the Ministry under The Cable Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 2021: 
a) Broadcasting Content Complaints Council (BCCC) with 318 TV channels 
as its members channels. 
b) News Broadcasters Federation - Professional News Broadcasting 
Standards Authority" (NBF -PNBSA) with 58 TV channels as its members 
channels. 
63. While noting that 543 Channels were not Members with any Self regulatory Body 
(SRB), the Ministry was asked as to how they  could be made a part of one or the other 
SRB. To this, they replied as under:-  
“As per Rule 17(1)(iv) of the Cable Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 
2021, every broadcaster is required to be a member of a self -regulatory body 
(SRB) and comply with its terms and conditions. Accordingly, all broadcasters 
vide Ministry’s letter dated 30.05.2023, were advised to become members of 
a self-regulatory body.    
In this regard, it is further stated that permission for satellite TV channels is 
granted as per the Policy Guidelines for uplinking and downlinking of 
Television Channels and the permission letter inter-alia, includes the following 
conditions: 
i. The permission holder company shall comply with the Programme and 
Advertisement Code prescribed under the Cable Television Networks 
(Regulation) Act, 1995 and rules framed there under. 
ii. The permission holder company shall adhere 
codes/standards/guidelines/restrictions prescribed by the MIB, 

36 
 
Government of India for regulation of content on TV channels from 
time to time. 
Further, para 11 (3)(c), 11(3)(e) & para 26 (4) of the Policy Guidelines, 2022 
dated 09.11.2022 states as under: 
Para 11(3)(c):“The applicant Company/LLP shall comply with the Programme 
and Advertising Code prescribed under the Cable Television Networks 
(Regulation) Act, 1995.” 
Para 11 (3)(e): “It shall adhere to any other Code/ Standards, guidelines/ 
restriction prescribed by the Ministry for regulation of content on TV channels 
from time to time.” 
Para 26 (4):  “The Central Government may, from time to time, issue general 
advisory for adherence to the Programme Code and Advertising Code and 
the various provisions of the Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act and 
Rules made there under, and such other advisory in relation to the 
Guidelines, and the channel shall comply with such advisory.” 
Therefore, rules 6 and 7 of the CTN Rules, 1994 (the Rules) in relation to 
sections 5 and 6 of the CTN Act, 1995, stipulates all the content in satellite TV 
channels must conform to the norms and standards prescribed in the 
Programme and Advertisement Code under the Rules. Accordingly, grievance 
and complaint redressal structure under these codes have to be always 
adhered to by the satellite TV channels”. 
 
64. To enhance the accountability of Broadcasters which are not affiliated with any 
SRB and to ensure the effective implementation of the three -tier grievance redressal 
mechanism, the Ministry submitted that a condition may be included in the uplinking/ 
downlinking permissions for satellite TV channels mandating broadcasters to either join 
an SRB registered with the Ministry or establish their own SRB and get it registered with 
the Ministry. When asked about the initiative take n in this regard, the Ministry informed 
about their letter to the Broadcasters dated 30.05.2023 and also submitted the 
following:- 
“Further, rules 6 and 7 of the CTN Rules, 1994 (the Rules) in relation to 
sections 5 and 6 of the CTN Act, 1995, stipulates all the content in satellite TV 
channels must conform to the norms and standards prescribed in the 
Programme and Advertisement Code under the Rules”. 
 
 
65. Clarifying about the regulation for TV channels which are not part of any self 
regulatory body, NBDA during evidence, submitted as under:- 
“Two questions were raised. One is about the regulated and unregulated 
members. NBDA is a voluntary organization. You can become a member but 
it is not mandatory by law. We encourage people to become a member; we 
encourage people to be regulated. But as I said, when they see that being 
under regulation is a problem, they prefer not to be a member. We have been 
asking the Ministry for almost 16 years that whether channels are members or 
not, they should be regulated by this self-regulation committee which we have 
created but we have no control over it. …xxxx….xxxx. It is not that those who 
are regulated don’t do mischief. They make mistakes. But they are punished. 

37 
 
But those who are not members, there is no control. So, everyone comes 
under this and they become part of this self-regulation.  
Sir, the issue is that we have been requesting the MIB that when you grant 
the licence to any person or organization for broadcasting, you have to give 
certain guidelines to them that they have to become member of x or y 
organization. We have been requesting them for years but our voice has not 
been heard. So, we would request this Committee to suggest that. If you are 
regulating us, this is also part of it, because this is self -regulation. Why don’t 
you make this mandatory that whosoever gets the license to run any news 
channel, national or regional, is supposed to be guided by certain principles. 
That is what is not happening. If that happens, a lot of people who are 
regulated and yet not regulated will have to come under this”.  
 
66. The Ministry was asked to provide their comment/suggestion on the above -
mentioned submission of NBDA made during the Sitting on 21.11.2024. To this, the 
reply was: 
“It is stated in this regard that joining of any association is a voluntary act and 
such action of compelling to join an organisation affiliated with any Self 
Regulating Body by Ministry would amount to controlling the broadcasting sector, 
which is unwarranted.  However, to enhance the accountability of broadcasters 
not affiliated with any SRB and to ensure the  effective implementation of the 
three-tier grievance redressal mechanism, a condition may be included in the 
uplinking/ downlinking permissions for satellite TV channels. This condition may 
mandate broadcasters to either join an SRB registered with the Ministry or 
establish their own SRB comprising at least 40 broadcasters and get it registered 
with the Ministry…xxx…xxx..xxx.. Ministry has not received any request from  
NBDA for registration as a self -regulatory body at level –II under Rule 18 (2) of 
CTN Rules, 2021”.  
 
 
(c)  Penal Provisions 
 
67. Regarding the Penal provisions for running/telecasting/printing Fake News, MIB 
submitted the following:- 
“Print Media:  As far as the dissemination of content in violation of the 
Norms of Journalistic conduct is concerned, the Press Council takes 
action under Section 14 of the Press Council Act, 1978 on receipt of a 
complaint against newspaper/magazine(s)/News agency(s) that allegedly 
indulged in violation of the Norms. Upon being found guilty the Council 
warns, admonishes, censures and disapproves the conduct of the 
journalist(s).  
Electronic Media: In case of private satellite TV channels, penal actions for 
proven cases of violation of Programme and Advertising Code are as 
follows: 
i. advising, warning, censuring, admonishing or reprimanding such 
broadcaster; or 
ii. requiring an apology of such broadcaster; or 

38 
 
iii. requiring such broadcaster to include a warning card or a 
disclaimer; or 
iv. requiring such broadcaster to delete or modify content or take the 
channel or a programme off-air for a specified time period where it 
is satisfied that such action is warranted, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing. 
Digital Media:  The IT Rules, 2021, notified under the Information 
Technology Act, 2000, provide for an institutional framework for content of 
digital news publisher. In this regard, section 45 of the Act provides that 
whoever contravenes any rules or regulations made under the Act, for the 
contravention of which no penalty has been separately provided, shall be 
liable to pay a compensation not exceeding twenty -five thousand rupees 
to the person affected by such contravention or a penalty not exceeding 
twenty-five thousand rupees”. 
 
68. Following is the submission of NBDA with respect to the penal provisions for 
running/telecasting/printing Fake News:- 
“As far as the Members of NBDA are concerned, Regulation 7 of the News 
Broadcasting & Digital Standards Regulations confer on NBDSA the power to 
impose penalties for violation of the Code of Conduct by the Broadcaster or 
Digital Publisher. The relevant portion of which is extracted below:  
For the first violation issue/express –  
a. warning, admonish, censure, disapproval, regret, apology and/or  
b. impose a fine of upto Rs. 2 lacs  
For the second violation issue/express –  
a. warning, admonish, censure, disapproval, regret, apology and/or  
b. impose a fine of upto Rs. 5 lacs  
For the third violation issue/express – 
a. warning, admonish, censure, disapproval, regret, apology and/or  
b. impose a fine upto Rs. 10 lacs  
For the fourth violation issue/express –  
a. warning, admonish, censure, disapproval, regret, apology and/or  
b. impose a fine upto 1% of the total annual turnover of the channel.  
Provided such fine shall not exceed Rs.25 lakhs, in any given matter.  
In addition to the above, on the fourth violation of the Code of Conduct, the 
Authority may direct a particular programme to be suspended for up to one 
week and/or direct the broadcaster to suspend the anchor for upto one month 
and/or issue any other direction as the Authority deems appropriate to the 
Broadcaster or Digital Publisher and/or recommend to the concerned 
authority for suspension/revocation of license of such broadcaster;  
Provided that the fine imposed by the Authority shall be recovered from the 
concerned Broadcaster or Digital Publisher;  
Provided that if the Authority holds that the Broadcaster or Digital Publisher 
has violated the Code of Conduct it will direct the Broadcaster/Digital  
Publisher to immediately remove or suitably edit the broadcast/publication 
from all Digital News Platforms, Social Media and Social Networking Sites;”  
Apart from the above, several legislations provide penalties for fake news, 
which are given herein below: 
 
 

39 
 
A. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023  
Section 175 - False statement in connection with an election  
Section 197(1)(d) - Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national 
integration  
Section 212 - Furnishing false information  
Section 353 - Statements conducing to public mischief  
B. Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act, 1995 read with Rule 
6(1)(d) of the Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994  
Section 19 - Power to prohibit transmission of certain programmes in 
public interest 
Section 20 - Power to prohibit operation of cable television network in 
public interest. 
C. Information Technology Act, 2000, Information Technology 
(Procedure and Safeguards for Blocking for Access of Information 
by Public), Rules 2009 and IT Rules, 2021  
Section 69A - Power to issue directions for blocking for public access of 
any information through any computer resource. 
Section 79 - Exemption from liability of intermediary in certain cases 
Rule 3 of the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines & Digital 
Media Ethics Code), 2021 [IT Rules, 2021] provides for Due diligence by 
Intermediaries [relevant excerpt reproduced below] 
Rule 7 - Non-observance of Rules”. 
 
69. On the same issue of penal provisions for running/telecasting/printing Fake 
News, Editors Guild of India (EGI) submitted as under:-  
“Section 353 of the newly enacted Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita  criminalizes 
making, publishing, or circulating statements, false information, rumors, or 
reports, including through electronic means, with the intent or likelihood of 
causing various harmful outcomes. Punishment for spreading fake news 
includes imprisonment for up to three years, a fine, or both for offenses under 
section 353.  …xxxx….xxxx….xxxx…. The Guild is of the firm view that any 
punitive action against misdeeds of Fake News, should not be in the realm of 
criminal law, and should be restricted to the civil domain. The appropriate 
response will be flagging and labeling fake news, naming and shaming, and 
in egregious cases, monetary fines to be a deterrent against such future acts 
or omissions”.  
70. When asked whether fine imposed for running Fake News was deterrent enough, 
the Ministry replied as under:- 
“In the absence of a clear definition of fake news and specific provisions in 
the rules governing content of different media verticals there is no penal 
provision specific to publication of fake news. As a result these rules fail to 
offer a credible deterrence to the publishers of fake new. Various 
legislative interventions like incorporating provisions relating to fake news 
in laws governing content on various media verticals, revisiting the safe 
harbor clause of the intermediaries etc. need to be considered to put in 
place a mechanism for deterring the publishers of fake news.  
 
71. With respect to same query, Editors Guild of India (EGI) submitted as under:- 

40 
 
“At present, there is no uniform code on this. xx…xxx…xxx.., there is a 
need for developing a consensus -driven code, along with appropriate 
measures to punish acts of publishing deliberate Fake News. 
xx…xxx…xxx..,, these punitive actions should be in the civil domain, with 
no criminal action. The amount of monetary fine is to be determined 
keeping in mind various factors - the size of the publishing entity, reach, 
recurrence of action, and the gravity or potential harm. This should all 
emerge from a consensus -building exercise between industry journalistic 
bodies and the Government”. 
 
72. On enquiring whether similar treatment may be given for same offence 
committed by different Media, MIB replied as under:- 
“The regulatory framework has different statutes for different media verticals, 
such as the Press Council Act, 1978 for print media, Cable Television 
Network Regulation Act, 1995 for electronic media and Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics. Code) Rules, 
2021 for news publishers on digital media. Since the regulatory framework for 
these platforms emanate from different Acts/Rules there are some differences 
in the penal provisions as per the statement of objects and reasons of each of 
these statutes”.   
 
73. The response of the TV Today Network, on the same query, is as under:- 
“No, but the severity of damage caused by misinformation spread by 
newspaper would be more controlled in today’s day and age when 
misinformation spread by social media could be far worse in terms of damage 
cause owing to its wide spreading nature”. 
[Ref: Q. No. 17 of Reply from TV Today Network]  
74. When asked whether the penal provisions, for publishing/running ‘Fake News’ in 
different forms of Media, are same for same nature of offence, following response was 
received from Hindustan Times:- 
“Yes, it should be the same, but it isn’t. The requirements are highest for print 
(PCI; statutory body); then comes electronic media; intermediaries and social 
media platforms get away with anything”. 
  
75. On being asked if variation in penalty was needed for repeated offenders, 
following submissions were received from MIB and various stakeholders:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Organisation/ 
Stakeholders 
Remarks/Suggestions with respect to need for variation 
in penalty for offenders of ‘Fake News’ 
1.  MIB  At present the instances of fake news are considered as part 
of the overall violation of the Codes/Norms under laws 
governing different media verticals and are treated 
accordingly. There is no provision for graded penalties 
according to number of times of such violation.  
2.  Hindustan 
Times 
There needs to be a hierarchy of actions.  
1. Warning plus public apology  
2. Fines  

41 
 
3. Suspensions  
4. Complete blocking 
3.  T.V. Today 
Network 
Limited 
The CTN Amendment Act, 2024 under Section 16 provides 
for harsher penalties for repeated offenders, as hereinunder:  
“16 (1) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this 
Act shall be liable-  
(a) for the first contravention with advisory, or censure, or 
warning, or a penalty which may extend to twenty thousand 
rupees, or with both;  
(b) for every subsequent contravention within a period of 
three years, with advisory, or censure, or warning, or a 
penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both, 
by such designated officer, as may be prescribed.  
(2) The designated officer, may, for the reasons to be 
recorded in writing, by order, impose penalty referred to in 
sub-section (1):  
Provided that in cases of more than three contraventions 
over a period of three years, the designated officer, in 
addition to penalty referred to in sub-section (1), may, for the 
reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, suspend or 
revoke the registration granted…”  
Further, Regulation 7 of NBDA Regulations provides for the 
powers of to give modified punishments in cases of repeated 
offenders.  
4.  Editors Guild 
of India (EGI) 
Yes, EGI sees the need for variation in penalties for 
offenders based on the frequency of their offenses. A 
graduated penalty system would ensure that repeat 
offenders face more stringent consequences, encouraging 
compliance while maintaining fairness. 
Proposed Approach: 
First-Time Offenders: 
Penalty: Mild penalties, such as warnings, fines, or 
mandatory content removal. 
Reason: This would allow offenders to correct their 
behaviour without severe consequences. 
Repeat Offenders: 
Penalty: Increased fines, temporary partial bans. 
Reason: This would deter persistent violations and 
encourage platforms or individuals to implement stricter 
content moderation. 
5.  Press Council 
of India (PCI)  
PCI does not have punitive powers. Under the PCI Act, 
1978, the maximum power that PCI has is to „Censure‟. 
Upon censuring a newspaper, the copy of adjudication is 
forwarded to the Central Bureau of Communication (CBC) 
for Central Government and concerned I&PRD and district 
administrations for State Governments. Thereupon, the CBC 
suspends the govt. advertisements issued to the particular 
newspaper for 15 days on first censure, for 1 month for 
second censure and 6 months for 3 or more censures by the 
PCI 

42 
 
76. When asked to share views w.r.t fixing  accountability (Media House/ Editor/ 
Reporter/etc.) for publishing ‘Fake News’, the Indian Express, replied as under:- 
“The Press & Registration of Periodicals Act lays down the responsibility for 
the selection of News content”.    
 
III. Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
77. Regarding the mechanism that was prevalent  for general public to report about 
Fake News, the Ministry replied as under:- 
“The Government of India has various statutory and institutional mechanisms 
in place to address fake news, on various media platforms viz. print media, 
electronic media and digital media, where action is taken on various 
complaints related to fake news are received from general public. Complaints 
relating to fake news can be made  using the Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism available for various media under the provisions of Press Council 
Act, 1978 for print media, Cable Television Network Regulation Act, 1995 for 
electronic media and the Information  Technology (Intermediary Guidelines 
and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 for news on digital media. 
 
People can also report fake news to PIB Fact Check Unit via the following 
mechanisms: 
WhatsApp Hotline : Users can send messages to the dedicated WhatsApp 
number at +918799711259 to report suspicious information or request fact -
checking. 
Email: Individuals can also send their queries or reports via email to 
socialmedia[at]pib[dot]gov[dot]in. 
Website Portal:  The public can visit the official PIB Fact Check portal at  
https://factcheck.pib.gov.in/ to report or request verification of potential fake 
news. 
These platforms allow users to easily submit information for fact-checking and 
help in addressing misinformation”. 
 
78. Details of the Grievance Redressal Mechanism available against Fake News for 
common man against different Media platforms, as submitted by MIB are as under:-. 
“Procedure for Print Media:  The newspapers have to adhere to “Norms of 
Journalistic Conduct” brought out by Press Council of India (PCI) which inter 
alia restrains publication of fake/ defamatory/ misleading news. The Council 
holds inquiry into alleged violations of Norms, as per section 14 of the Act, 
and may warn, admonish or censure the newspaper, editors, journalists, etc. 
as the case may be. Any citizen can make a complaint against a newspaper 
for carrying content that is violative of the Norms of Journalistic Conduct. A 
complainant can also submit a complaint to the PCI on CPGRAM of the 
Government. 
Procedure for private TV channels - All programmes telecast on private 
satellite TV channels are required to adhere to the Programme Code and 
Advertising Code enshrined in Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 
1995 and the Rules framed thereunder. The Programme Code inter -alia 
provides that ‘No programme should be carried in the cable service which 

43 
 
contains anything obscene, defamatory, deliberate, false and suggestive 
innuendos and half truths’. 
The Cable Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 2021 provide for a 
statutory mechanism for redressal of grievances/ complaints of citizens 
relating to content broadcast by television channels.  In order to ensure 
observance and adherence to the Programme Code and the Advertising 
Code by the broadcaster and to address the grievance or complaint, if any, 
relating thereto, the Rules provide a three -level complaint redressal structure 
as under:  
Level I - broadcasters;  
Level II - self-regulating bodies of the broadcasters; and  
Level III - Oversight mechanism by the Central Government.  
As per the extant procedure, grievances regarding content on private satellite 
TV channels are addressed through the three -tier mechanism. At Level I, the 
broadcaster address the complaint. At Level II , it is referred to the 
broadcaster's self -regulatory body. If unresolved, the matter progresses to 
Level III, where it is reviewed by the IDC along with the channel's response. 
The TV channel is also given an opportunity for a personal hearing through its 
representative. 
Procedure for Digital Media: The IT Rules, 2021 provide a three -level 
institutional framework for redressal of grievances related to the violation of 
Code of Ethics by news publishers on digital media and OTT platforms as 
under: 
Level I:  Publisher 
Level II:  Self-Regulatory Bodies of publishers 
Level III:  Oversight Mechanism by the Central Government 
A citizen can make a complaints initially to the respective publisher at Level-I”. 
 
79. While noting that a citizen can make complaints initially to the respective 
publisher at Level-I, the Committee desired to know whether all the Publishers at Level-I 
have the mandatory Grievance redressal officer in place. To this, the Ministry replied as 
under:- 
“The Ministry has information of approx. 4300 Digital News Publishers with 
robust Grievance Redressal mechanism in place. Further, Rule 9(1) relating to 
adherence of the Code of Ethics by the publishers of news and current affairs 
on digital media and OTT platforms; and Rule 9(3) relating to the three -level 
grievance redressal mechanism  have been stayed by Hon’ble Bombay 
High Court vide order dated 14.08.2021 in two cases filed in Bombay High 
Court in WP(L) NO.14172 of 2021 - Agij Promotion of Nineteen  one a Media 
Pvt. Ltd.& Ors. vs. Union of In dia and PIL (L) No. NO.14204 OF 2021 -Nikhil 
Mangesh Wagle vs. Union of India. This Ministry filed SLPs in Supreme Court 
against these orders. 
Hon’ble Supreme Court vide order dated 22.03.2024 transferred all 15 Writ 
Petitions challenging the maintainability of IT Rules, 2021 to Delhi High Court 
and all these related SLPs challenging the interim order passed by the High 
Court was also disposed of with the direction to make necessary prayers 
before the Delhi High Court”.   
 
 
 
 

44 
 
80. The updated status of the SLP, as provided by the Ministry are as under:- 
“Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order dated 22.03.2024 transferred all 15 Writ 
Petitions to Delhi High Court and all these related SLPs challenging the 
interim order passed by the Bombay High Court was also disposed of with the 
direction to make necessary prayers before the Delhi High Court. Now all 
cases are pending before Hon'ble Delhi High Court. 
The grievances received in the Ministry are transferred to the publishers of 
news and current affairs on digital media for resolution at Level -I of the three 
level grievance redressal mechanism but the resolution of the grievances by 
such publishers are voluntary in nature since the operation of Rule 9(1) 
relating to adherence of the Code of Ethics by the publishers of news and 
current affairs on digital media and OTT platforms; and Rule 9(3) relating to 
the three level grievance redressal mechanism have been stayed by Hon’ble 
Bombay High Court”. 
81. Pointing out the lacuna in Grievance redressal w.r.t online platforms, News 
Broadcasters and Digital Association (NBDA) submitted the following during evidence:- 
“तीिरा ऑप्शन र्ह है कक  हम इनके  खिलाफ  सशकार्त करें।  फेिब ुक  के  खिलाफ  सशकार्त करें  र्ा 
ट्ववटर के  खिलाफ  सशकार्त करें , लेककन  इनका  कोई  फ ेि नहीं  है, इनका  कोई  रीप्रेजेंटेदटव नहीं  है। 
उिाहरण के  सलए  फेिब ुक  के  पहले  इंडिर्ा में रीप्रेजेंटेदटव्ि रहते थे, इंडिवव जुअल्ि थे, अब  कोई  नहीं  है, 
िबको  हटा दिर्ा गर्ा, अब  आपको  एक  मशीन  िे बात  करनी  है। वह  मशीन  जवाब  िेगी, नहीं  िेगी, 
टर्ा कहेगी , टर्ा नहीं  कहेगी , उि पर ककिी  का  कोई  कंरोल  नहीं  है।  
चौथा ऑप्शन आपके  पाि र्ह होता है कक  आप कोटा  में जाएं। जब  कोटा  में जाते हैं, तो कोटा  तो िोनों  
िाइड्ि को  िुन ता है, कफर फैिला  करता  है। इिमें 15-20 दिनों  का  प्रोिेि लगता  है। कई  बार वे  बगैर 
िूिरी िाइि को  िुन े हुए, केि  की  गंभीरता को  िेिते हुए ऑिार िे िेते हैं। लेककन  क्जतनी िेर में कोटा 
का  ऑिार आता है, उतनी  िेर में वह  वीडिर्ो वाइिस्प्रेि हो चुक ा होता है।  
उिके  बाि र्े जो इंटरसमड्रीज़ हैं, फेिब ुक  है, र्ू-ट्र्ूब  है, र्े जो प्लेटफॉम्िा हैं, र्े कोटा के  उि ऑिार को  
इंक्प्लमेंट करने  िे इनकार  कर  िेते हैं। कफर आप उनके  खिलाफ  कनटेम्प्ट फाइल  करते  हैं। कफर िोबारा 
कोटा  जब  उनको  ब ुल ाता है, तब  वे  उि ऑिार को  इंक्प्लमेंट करते  हैं। लेककन  तब  तक  इतना  िैमेज हो 
चुक ा हो चुक ा होता है, क्जिके बारे में िबर  फैलाई  जा रही है, उिकी  ब हुत बिनामी  हो चुक ी होती है, 
उिको  तरह-तरह िे न ुक िान  हो चुक ा होता है”। 
 
82. Responding to a query related to online portal for registering complaints with 
respect to Fake News, Editors Guild of India (EGI) submitted as under:- 
“To the best of our knowledge, there is none. The Guild recommends that an 
online portal be developed in collaboration with industry bodies like EGI, INS, 
NBDA, DNPA, DigiPub, AIM, as well as tech platforms. This portal would serve 
as a complaint registering mechanism. Complaints can then be forwarded to the 
various bodies for any action they may wish to take. This approach will be more 
effective if there is a network of recognized self -regulatory bodies to address 
these complaints, along with an enforcement mechanism in partnership with 
platforms, which would check and label content as problematic or fake”.  
 
 

45 
 
(a) Time taken to address the complaint  
 
83. When asked about the approximate time taken to settle the issue, once the issue 
of Fake News is flagged by someone, the Ministry replied as under:- 
“Any person aggrieved by the content of a programme of a channel as not 
being in conformity with the Programme Code or the Advertising Code may 
file his complaint in writing to the broadcaster directly with specific details of 
the complaints i.e. Level - I. Further, any complaints received in the Ministry 
are also forwarded to the Broadcasters i.e. at Level – I for taking action in 
accordance with the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995. The 
broadcaster shall, within twenty -four hours of complaint being filed, generate 
and issue an acknowledgement to the complainant for his information and 
record. 
Rule 16(3) of the Cable Television Network (Amendment) Rules, 2021 
provides that “Every complaint shall be dealt with in the following manner, 
namely”: - 
 (a)  the broadcaster shall dispose of the complaint and inform the complainant 
of its decision within fifteen days of receipt of such complaint; 
 (b)  if the decision of the broadcaster is not communicated to the complainant 
within the stipulated period of fifteen days, or if the complainant is not satisfied 
with the decision of the broadcaster, he may prefer an appeal to the self -
regulating body of which such broadcaster is a member, within fifteen days 
therefrom; 
 (c) the self -regulating body shall dispose of the appeal within sixty days  of 
receipt of appeal and convey its decision in the form of a guidance or advisory to 
the broadcaster, and inform the complainant of such decision within a period 
of fifteen days; 
(d) where the complainant is not satisfied  with the decision of the self -
regulating body, he may, within fifteen days of such decision, prefer an 
appeal to the Central Government  for its consideration under the Oversight 
Mechanism referred to in rule 19.  
The IDC meets periodically and hear s complaints regarding violation or 
contravention of the Programme Code and the Advertising Code escalated to 
Level-III and makes recommendations such as advisory, warning, censuring, 
admonishing, run apology scrolls, take off air etc. The Central Government 
may, after taking into consideration the recommendations of the Committee, 
issue appropriate orders and directions under sub -section (3) of section 20 of 
the Act for compliance by the broadcaster”. 
 
84. Regarding the time limit prescribed for PCI to act on complaints, the  reply of the 
Ministry was:- 
“There is no time limit prescribed for Press Council of India to act on 
complaints. Such a time limit may be recommended, giving exception for 
procedural delays”. 
 

46 
 
85. On being asked about the average time taken to adjudicate a complaint under 
Sections 13 and 14 of PCI Act, MIB reply was:- 
“Being a quasi -judicial authority with all powers of the civil court and on the 
other, in its advisory capacity; PCI guides the press as well as the authorities 
on any matter that may have a bearing on the freedom of the press and on 
preserving high standards of journalistic ethos. 
Complaint is registered under the relevant section (s) i.e. U/s 13 (Complaints 
by the Press) and 14 (Complaints against the Press) of Press Council Act, 
1978. The Complainant is required to comply with mandatory requirements 
under Regulation (3) of Press Council (Procedure for Inquiry) Regulation, 
1979 within four (4) weeks 
 
86. When enquired whether, there is any mechanism to digitally track and notify 
complainants about the progress of the complaints, PCI replied as under:-  
“No, however, the Council is in process of developing complaint mechanism 
software with online complaint submission and tracking facility”. 
 
 
87. Considering the damage inflicted by Fake News in a short span of time, the 
Ministry was asked about the need to re -visit the process especially w.r.t the time taken 
to dispose off the case/to take action against a Channel/portal/paper. To this, they 
replied as under:- 
“The time limit for handling of grievances at various levels of the Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism in respect of the content of broadcasters has been 
prescribed keeping in view the principles of natural justice and taking into 
account the time required for processing of such grievance at these levels”.  
 
88. On the need to revisit the process, NBDA submitted:- 
“It may be noted that in 2024, NBDA has amended the Regulations to confer 
emergency powers on NBDSA.... xxxx....xxxx....xxxx.... In view of the above 
regulation, wherein NBDSA can issue directions to remove content within 24 
hours of the violation being brought to its notice, NBDA does not feel the 
necessity to re -visit the process especially w.r.t the time taken to dispose of 
the case/to take action against a Channel/Digital Publisher, which is a 
member of NBDA”. 
 
89. On being asked as to what could be done to reduce the response time for taking 
down the content which is flagged as ‘Fake News’, the response of the Ministry was:- 
“The Government as a general policy does not interfere with reporting of 
news across media and there is no such mandate of taking down the content 
as per the statutory provisions in place. 
However, in emergent situations, Section 20 of the Cable Television Networks 
(Regulation) Act, 1995, grants powers to the Central Government to regulate 
or prohibit the transmission or re -transmission of any channel or program in 
such situations where content poses a threat to sovereignty or integrity of 
India, security of India, friendly relations of India with any foreign State or 
public order, decency or morality. This section collectively ensures a robust 

47 
 
mechanism to address emergent situations promptly and maintain 
accountability in television broadcasting, safeguarding public interest and 
national integrity”. 
 
IV. Artificial Intelligence, Algorithm and Fake News 
 
(a)  Artificial Intelligence and Fake News 
90. On being asked as to how Al can be used to flag content without infringing on 
freedom of expression, MIB replied as under:- 
 “The technology of Artificial Intelligence is an evolving technology and works 
on use of pre -existing information available on internet and therefore, it is felt 
that in its present state of development  it cannot be used for a subject as 
complicated as fact checking. AI could be used to flag potentially fake news/ 
misleading content for review by human intervention as a second layer of 
monitoring”.   
 
91. Regarding the role and challenges associated with use of AI and Deepfakes in  
generating, detecting and preventing the spread of ‘Fake News’ , the Ministry responded 
as under:- 
“Detecting fake news and identifying patterns of misinformation relating to 
functioning of Government requires use of various mechanisms to verify the 
information from the concerned credible sources in different 
Ministries/Departments. Use of AI could be integrated in the fact checking 
processes of FCU and Fact Checkers of the media organizations to augment 
their capabilities.    
The technology of Artificial Intelligence, however, is an evolving technology 
and works on use of pre -existing information available on internet and 
therefore, it is felt that in its present state of development cannot be used for 
a subject as complicated as fact checking. AI could be used to flag potentially 
fake news/ misleading content for review by human intervention as a second 
layer of monitoring.   
 
However, despite their potential, automated systems face several challenges. 
Al detection tools often struggle with hybrid content that blends real and false 
information, or with material in low -resource regional languages that lack 
sufficient training data. Additionally, bad actors constantly evolve their 
methods to bypass detection, and the speed at which fake content spreads 
online often outpace the ability to verify and counter it. Addressing these 
issues requires a multi -pronged approach: enhancing the accuracy of Al 
detection tools through multilingual training, fostering collaborations between 
fact-checkers and platforms, introducing legal safeguards against misuse, 
and launching public awareness campaigns to improve digital literacy. 
Together, these strategies can help balance the powerful yet complex role of 
Al in the battle against fake news”. 
 

48 
 
92. On the role of AI and Deepfake s in Fake News , following is the submission of  
Editors Guild of India (EGI):- 
“Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Deepfakes have significant potential in 
detecting and preventing the spread of fake news by providing sophisticated 
tools for verification, identifying manipulated content, and flagging 
misinformation in real time. Here’s how they play a critical role: 
• AI for Text-based Fake News Detection 
• Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
• Fact-Checking Automation 
• Sentiment Analysis 
• AI in Image and Video Verification 
• Deepfake Detection 
• Image Forensics 
• Reverse Image Search 
• AI in Social Media Monitoring 
• Real-Time Monitoring and Content Flagging 
• Misinformation Detection and Tracking 
• Bot Detection 
• AI in Identifying Bias and Misinformation Patterns 
• Bias Detection 
• Fake News Pattern Recognition 
Preventing the Spread of Fake News 
• Automated Moderation 
• AI-Enhanced Fact-Checking 
Conclusion: 
AI and Deepfakes represent both a challenge and an opportunity in the battle 
against fake news. On the one hand, AI’s ability to analyze vast amounts of 
data and detect subtle inconsistencies in text, images, and video provides 
powerful tools for identifying misinformation before it spreads widely. On the 
other hand, the rise of Deepfakes and manipulated content necessitates 
advanced AI -driven solutions to ensure that the authenticity of media is 
preserved. 
While AI can significantly enhance the detection and prevention of fake news, 
it must be applied with careful consideration to avoid bias and ensure that it 
doesn’t infringe on freedom of expression. As these technologies evolve, their 
integration into broader media literacy efforts, collaboration with independent 
fact-checkers, and transparent regulatory frameworks will be crucial in 
effectively addressing the fake news problem”. 
 
93. On the same issue, submission of Hindustan Times was:- 
“As a recent paper put it “Artificial intelligence (AI) systems are playing an 
overarching role in the disinformation phenomenon our world is currently 
facing. Such systems boost the problem not only by increasing opportunities 
to create realistic AI -generated fake content, but also, and essentially, by 
facilitating the dissemination of disinformation to a targeted audience and at 
scale by malicious stakeholders”. 
 

49 
 
94. NBDA, on the role of AI and Deepfakes  in generating, detecting and preventing 
the spread of 'Fake News', has submitted as under:- 
“In this digital era, AI has ushered in remarkable innovation, with tech 
companies promising new features & products in respect of AI for which 
billions of dollars have been invested. However, as one sifts hype from reality, 
it is evident that currently, AI outputs are evolving. …xxxx…xxxx…xxxx.        
AI can further be deployed to understand the nuances between 
misinformation (unintentional spread of falsehoods) and disinformation 
(deliberate spread) – as is crucial for effective countermeasures, which could 
be facilitated by AI analysis of content. However, at the same time, the 
training data that is used for building large language models to understand 
and distinguish between fake news and opinion is very important.  Therefore, 
theoretically, AI can be trained to detect linguistic patterns associated with 
fake news, such as obvious deviations from journalistic norms, for verifying 
sources and spotting manipulated media content and may appear as an ideal 
solution for content moderation, given the vast volume of information shared 
on social media platforms.  
However, AI tools are not perfect, and society does not possess the same 
level of confidence in technology when it comes to complex decision-making.  
Automation may amplify human errors. Since AI are trained on datasets, they 
could suffer from the risk of bias, not being diverse and adequately 
representative, if the training data is flawed. Further, it is also possible for the 
programmers' inherent bias to be inadvertently included in the training data, 
leading AI to perpetuate those biases in its decision -making. 
…xxxx…xxxx…xxxx. T here are also legal challenges associated with AI, 
particularly the violation of copyright in the data used for training large 
language models including for detection of fake news. In fact, there is already 
litigation pending in the USA and India concerning the violation of copyright 
by AI. To ensure that there is no adverse consequence for news publishers, it 
is essential that any use of AI including for detection of fake news should not 
violate the copyright held by publishers of online content. Further, it is 
reiterated that news publishers must be paid for any content that is used in 
training of large language models including for detection of fake news.  
As a result, while AI may seem like a panacea for fake news, using AI for 
content moderation has to be clearly monitored to balance freedom of speech 
and expression and ethics with innovation. Robust guardrails, along with an 
incrementalist approach, should be adopted as far as the use of AI is 
concerned. In view of the drawbacks, a hybrid approach, which is a 
combination of technology -driven solutions and human judgment, may be 
effective in curbing fake news. The report of the EU DisinfoLab’s annual 
conference, which took place in October 2024, also reiterates a balanced 
approach to tackle the challenges associated with digital disinformation, 
which combines AI innovation with expert oversight. It states that while “AI’s 
ability to streamline data analysis, enhance pattern detection, and forecast 
influence operations offers unprecedented accuracy, however, human 
verification remains crucial to ensure accuracy, reliability, and transparency in 
AI-driven investigations”.  Some intermediaries have already adopted this 
hybrid approach to deal with content-related issues”. 
 

50 
 
95. Views of T.V. Today Network Limited , on the role of AI and Deepfakes  in 
generating, detecting and preventing the spread of 'Fake News' is as under:- 
“AI Transforming the Indian Media Industry: …xxxx…xxxx…xxxx… Nearly 
60% of media companies said in a survey that they are prepared to take 
advantage of AI. A recent EY -FICCI report on India’s Media & Entertainment 
sector estimates use of AI wi ll provide ₹ 45,000 crore boost to this segment 
by 2027.  
Risks and Misuses of AI: While media outfits such as the India Today Group, 
have been cautious and deliberate in adopting AI responsibly, there are 
several bad actors who have made a “bad use” of th e Tech to earn quick 
money through deepfake videos, phishing emails, cyber -attacks and 
mushrooming of misinformation sites. Deepfake videos, images and audio are 
making it extremely hard for humans to tell real from fake. Al avatars looking 
and sounding too much like their human counterparts are already causing 
mistrust and frustration. This needs to be regulated.   
Responsible AI Use: Leveraging AI effectively involves the conscious and 
deliberate use of Tech with a focus on positive impact. Besides fixing the 
basics, the use of AI tech and its outputs need to become fully transparent 
through the use of labels, signatures, credentials, etc.  
Global Regulatory Efforts: Governments the world over are considering ways 
to regulate the use of AI to drive positive impact. The EU recently adopted the 
AI Act which happens to be the world’s first comprehensive law governing the 
use of AI. Similarly, the government of India too is considering policies which 
allow AI to be used creatively, which delivers responsible AI for all. The 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) issued an advisory 
on 26 December 2023 for digital intermediaries and platforms. All social 
media platforms were required to comply with existing IT rules specifically 
focused on misinformation powered by AI and deepfakes”. 
96. Following is the submission of Network -18 on the role of AI, Deepfakes and 
related issues:- 
“The rapid pace at which online content is created and shared has made 
tackling fake news a significant challenge. However, technological advances, 
particularly in AI, offer promising solutions.  
AI can revolutionize fact-checking by quickly analyzing patterns, sources, and 
claims to identify potential fake news. These AI tools can act as an early 
warning system, flagging misinformation before it becomes widespread. They 
can also detect duplicate claims across multiple platforms, helping fact -
checkers prioritize efforts and focus on new misinformation. 
In India, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MEITY) has 
launched initiatives to detect fake news. Two key projects funded by MEITY 
are: the Fake Speech Detection using Deep Learning Framework, aimed at 
detecting fake speech and creating a verification platform, and the Design 
and Development of Software for Detecting Deepfake Videos and Images, 
which has led to the creation of a prototype tool by C -DAC Hyderabad and 
Kolkata to detect deepfakes”. 
 

51 
 
97. On being asked whether Al could distinguish between misinformation, 
disinformation, and satire, MIB responded as under:- 
“The term “Fake news” is commonly understood as information which is false 
or misleading and presented as news. The FCU under PIB factchecks 
misinformation and disinformation being spread  only relating to the 
functioning of the Central Government  and does not cover the information 
genres like political satire etc.    
The spectrum of issues around flow of information viz. information, 
disinformation, misinformation, fake information etc. first need to be defined 
and a working model be developed to segregate these in different categories. 
The use of tools like AI etc. could then be integrated in the processes of fact 
checking”. 
 
98. The response of Editors Guild of India (EGI), to the same query, is as under:-  
“AI often struggles with distinguishing satire from misinformation or 
disinformation, especially when the context, audience, or tone is ambiguous. 
The interpretation of intent remains a significant limitation, as AI lacks a 
human understanding of irony, humor, and cultural context”. 
 
99. Regarding the challenges in using automated systems like AI and Deepfakes to 
identify Fake News, EGI submitted as under:- 
“The key challenges in using AI to identify fake news include bias in training 
datasets, which can lead to inaccurate outcomes, and false 
positives/negatives that undermine user trust. Additionally, malicious actors 
continually develop evasion tactics, such as sophisticated misinformation 
techniques, while resource -intensive AI systems raise privacy concerns. 
These challenges can be addressed by conducting regular bias audits, 
improving datasets with diverse content, combining AI with human 
moderation, and investing in advanced NLP models capable of detecting 
subtle misinformation patterns. Collaborative public -private investments in AI 
tools can also help overcome resource limitations”. 
 
100. On the challenges related to using AI and Deepfakes to identify Fake News, 
NBDA replied as under:- 
i. The challenges in using automated systems like AI to identify Fake 
News are detailed hereunder:  
ii. AI can fail to flag harmful content or incorrectly flag harmless content, 
thereby impinging free speech rights.  
iii. It may result in over-censorship or suppression of free speech when AI 
mistakenly flag content popularly known as “false positives”.  
iv. There may be concerns about transparency and accountability, which 
may become challenging for digital news publishers to provide clear 
explanation as to why a certain content was flagged.  
v. AI may lack contextual understanding.  
vi. Biases have been inherent in the training of the large language model 
and in natural language programming.  

52 
 
 
101. According to News Broadcasters and Digital Association (NBDA), the solution 
with respect to challenges witnessed while using automated systems like AI and 
Deepfakes to identify Fake News, are as under:- 
a) These challenges may be combated by creating algorithms which 
strike a balance between free speech and censorship.  
b) Any entity using AI in content related issues should be transparent and 
there should be a mechanism for an effective appeal process for 
aggrieved users in case of a false positive removal of content by AI.  
c) Constant monitoring, improvement, updation of and refinement of AI 
models must be undertaken to keep abreast with the current political, 
economic and social landscape in content related issues, since content 
is evolving constantly.  
d) Leveraging human -AI hybrid moderation systems can mitigate the 
shortcomings of fully automated approaches. Human moderators can 
provide context and judgment in cases where AI algorithms struggle, 
thereby ensuring a more nuanced and balanced approach to issues 
related to content.  
102. When asked whether labelling  of the Al generated content should be made 
mandatory for facilitating its identification, MIB replied as under:- 
“AI generated content can be labeled, primarily to ensure transparency, build 
trust and prevent the spread of misinformation. Such content through 
deepfakes or autogenerated misinformation on politically and socially 
sensitive matters can seriously mislead the public. However, in view of the 
Ministry’s stance on self -regulation as the way forward the social media 
intermediaries and electronic media maybe consulted on the practicality 
towards implementation of such compulsory labeling and arrive at a mutual 
consensus before making it mandatory”.  
 
103. Following were the responses from some of the stakeholders regarding labelling 
to be made mandatory for AI generated content for facilitating its identification:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Organisation/ 
Stakeholders 
Remarks/Suggestions on labelling be made mandatory for AI 
generated content 
1.  Hindustan 
Times 
 
Yes. Labelling and disclosure is a best practice in media. 
2.  T.V. Today 
Network 
Limited 
Yes, it should be made mandatory for AI -generated content to 
be clearly labelled, primarily to ensure transparency, build trust, 
and prevent the spread of misinformation. In the context of 
news media, where credibility and accountability are paramount, 
audiences must be able to distinguish between human-authored 
journalism and machine -generated content. Labelling helps 
users evaluate the reliability and intent behind the information 
they consume, especially as AI -generated text, images, and 
videos increasingly mimic authentic human communication. 
Users are better able to understand the source and can take 
more informed decisions about the possible biases, 
correctness, and motive of the content. This is particularly 

53 
 
critical in political or sensitive contexts, where deepfakes or 
autogenerated misinformation can seriously mislead the public. 
Mandatory labelling also serves as a safeguard against 
potential reputational risks for news organizations, helping 
maintain editorial integrity and ethical standards. Importantly, it 
facilitates accountability, making it easier to trace and respond 
to harmful or erroneous content. Lastly, labelling can assist with 
tracing the source of AI -generated content, which may be 
relevant for intellectual property rights if AI models are trained 
on copyrighted sources. 
3.  Network-18 The implementation of mechanisms to label AI -generated 
content and flag suspected misinformation can empower users 
to make informed judgments about the credibility of what they 
see online. These voluntary yet impactful actions by platforms 
can contribute substantially to curbing the spread of 
misinformation, while upholding the principles of free speech 
and open dialogue. 
 
104. When MIB was asked to provide comment s/suggestions on the submission of 
NBDA made during the Sitting on 21.11.2024, wherein they had stated that the creator 
of Artificial Intelligence, Sam Altman,  had delivered a speech, and he had requested 
Indian Government to have a certain regulatory body to take care of Al because there is 
no end to Al, the reply was as under:- 
“Further, to address the emerging challenges   in the cyberspace like Artificial 
Intelligence, Machine Learning, deepfakes powered by AI, Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) is seized of the matter and 
has issued advisories  dated 26.12.2023 and  15.03.2024, reminding the 
intermediaries about their due -diligence obligations outlined under the IT 
Rules, 2021 and advising them on countering unlawful content including 
malicious ‘synthetic media’ and ‘deepfakes’”. 
 
105. With respect to researches/projects that are going on for using AI in checking 
Fake News, following was the submission of NBDA:- 
“There are several ongoing research projects on using AI for checking fake 
news. In India, as per news reports and the status report submitted, pursuant 
to the Order of the Hon’ble Delhi High Court in W.P.(C) 15596/2023 and 
W.P.(C) 6560/2024, on 20th November 2024, the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MEITY) has constituted a nine -member Committee 
on matters related to the ‘issue of deepfakes’. Further, MEITY has funded two 
projects to detect fake news, which are currently underway, they are as 
follows:  
i. Fake Speech Detection using Deep Learning Framework  
The project was started in December 2021 and is set to conclude in 
December 2024. The objective of the project is to “ detect fake speech, create 
a web interface for detection software, and develop a “speaker verification 
software platform designed for testing any fake speech detection system”.  

54 
 
ii. Design and Development of Software for Detecting Deepfake Videos and 
Images  
Under this project, C -DAC Hyderabad and Kolkata have developed a 
prototype tool to detect deepfakes.  
Even internationally, there are several ongoing research projects on detecting 
AI-generated content and developing AI tools that facilitate the detection of 
fake news. Vera.ai, short for VERificiation Assisted by Artificial Intelligence, is 
an example of such a research project. The project harnesses the capabilities 
of fourteen experienced partner organizations, including leading research 
teams, technology experts, NGOs, the European Broadcasting Union and 
Deutsche Welle, to develop AI solutions to detect synthetic images, content 
and deepfakes.   
AI4TRUST is an example of another EU-funded ongoing research project that 
aims to develop a hybrid system based on machine -human cooperation and 
advanced solutions based on AI to tackle disinformation. The project aims to 
make monitoring and flagging of high -risk content, including multi -lingual 
content possible on online social platforms in real -time for expert review by 
employing novel AI algorithms.  
Another research project called HYBRIDS - Hybrid Intelligence to monitor, 
promote, and analyse transformation in good democracy practice, funded by 
the EU and the United Kingdom Research and Innovation, aims to combine 
human knowledge with AI to combat disinformation. 
In the United States, the researchers at Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT) Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab (CSAIL) 
and the Qatar Computing Research Institute (QCRI) have developed a new 
machine learning system to detect fake news and determine whether a news 
source is accurate or biased.  
Apart from the projects mentioned above, there are several other research 
projects which are being conducted in respect of using AI to check Fake 
News”. 
 
 
106. On enquiring, whether Editors Guild of India ( EGI) was aware of 
researches/projects that were going on for using AI in checking Fake News, they replied 
as under:- 
“Yes, the Editors Guild of India (EGI) is aware of various research projects 
and initiatives that explore the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in combating 
fake news. AI and machine learning (ML) technologies are increasingly being 
employed to enhance the ability to detect, verify, and prevent the spread of 
misinformation and disinformation. Here are some key developments and 
projects in this field: 
1. AI-based Fact-Checking Tools 
Google Jigsaw’s Perspective API 
ClaimBuster 
2. Deep Learning for Image and Video Verification 
Fake News Detection on Social Media Using AI-based Image Verification 
3. AI for Detecting Disinformation on Social Media 
4. AI to Identify Misinformation Networks 
5. AI-Powered Tools for Content Verification and Fact-Checking 
InVID (Video and Image Verification Tool) 

55 
 
6. Collaboration between AI and Fact-Checking Networks 
IFCN and AI Research Partnerships 
Conclusion: 
The Editors Guild of India (EGI) acknowledges the increasing role of AI in 
combating fake news, particularly in detecting misleading visual content, 
verifying claims, and identifying the networks responsible for spreading 
misinformation. AI technologies such as deep learning algorithms, natural 
language processing, and graph analysis are proving invaluable in the fight 
against fake news by providing more efficient and scalable solutions. 
However, while AI can aid in detection, it must be implemented with caution to 
avoid biases and ensure that the freedom of expression is not infringed upon. 
AI must complement human fact-checking”. 
 
(b) Algorithm and Fake News 
107. According to the Ministry, a lgorithms used by social media platforms play a 
critical role in shaping the flow of information. Since sensational content often generates 
more clicks, likes, and shares, these platforms' algorithms tend to prioritize such stories, 
which are sometimes fake or misleading. Because of this , Social media platforms like 
Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram generally have a tendency to amplify Fake News.  
108. On being asked about the mechanism to address the above -mentioned concern, 
MIB replied as under:- 
“The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) regarding the 
issue of AI governance and accountability, has informed that the Government 
is committed to ensure accountability, safety, and fairness while upholding 
human rights and privacy. This strategy includes robust regulatory 
frameworks, transparent AI governance, and independent oversight 
mechanisms to prevent bias, discrimination, and misuse. Further, the 
Government has approved an India’s AI Mission as a comprehensive 
programme for leveraging transformative technologies to foster inclusion, 
innovation and adoption for social impact as well as to make India a global 
leader in the AI space and ensure responsible and transformational use of Al 
for all. The ‘Safe and Trusted AI’ pillar under the Mission emphasizes the 
need for responsible AI development, deployment and adoption and enables 
implementation of ‘Responsible AI Projects’ which include development of 
indigenous tools and frameworks, self -assessment checklists for innovators 
and other guidelines and governance frameworks”. 
109. Following submissions have been made by some of the stakeholders regarding 
role of algorithm in Fake News:- 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Organisation/
Stakeholders 
Remarks/Suggestions with respect to role of algorithm in 
Fake News 
1.  Editors Guild 
of India (EGI) 
“Algorithms, particularly those driven by engagement metrics, 
often prioritize sensational content, inadvertently amplifying 
fake news. This occurs because sensational or emotionally 
charged posts tend to attract more interactions, regardless of 
their accuracy. To minimize these risks, platforms should 

56 
 
promote fact -checked content over purely engagement -driven 
metrics, introduce algorithmic transparency through regular 
audits, and redesign algorithms to expose users to diverse 
viewpoints, breaking the cycle of echo chambers”. 
2.  Hindustan 
Times 
It is a dangerous trend. Social media companies and Big Tech 
should be treated like media companies, their safe harbour 
protection should be removed. 
3.  T.V. Today 
Network 
Limited 
Algorithms can produce a feedback loop that, if initiated, can 
greatly accelerate the dissemination of false information. Users 
are more likely to come across misleading content again after 
interacting with it. Their beliefs are simply reinforced by the 
constant appearance of false information in their feeds – both 
on online platforms and through WhatsApp. Additionally, when 
users share this content, their network which may include 
people they wouldn't have otherwise seen sees the same 
information. This network effect makes it difficult to stop the 
rapid spread of misinformation. To combat algorithm -driven 
deception, a multifaceted approach is required. Social media 
companies need to be held more responsible for the content 
that their algorithms suggest. It can be resolved by 
strengthening internal fact -checking procedures and enforcing 
more stringent content control requirements. Promoting critical 
thinking and educating consumers about the risks of 
misleading information are equally important. People must be 
able to recognise deceptive content and challenge its veracity. 
Combining these two strategies can lessen algorithms' 
detrimental influence on data integrity. At the same time, it is 
important for law enforcement to step in and take action 
against complaints regarding fake news and use of deep fakes. 
4.  Network-18 Platforms should take a proactive approach in empowering 
their user base to combat the spread of misinformation by 
simplifying content reporting mechanisms. Making it easier for 
ordinary users to flag suspicious content can significantly 
enhance the speed at which platforms can address emerging 
threats. Simplified reporting systems will not only help in 
detecting fake news but also allow platforms to respond more 
swiftly to urgent issues, reducing the window of exposure for 
harmful content”. 
5.  Indian Express Algorithms used by social media platforms play a critical role in 
shaping the flow of information. Since sensational content often 
generates more clicks, likes, and shares, these platforms’ 
algorithms tend to prioritize such content, which are sometimes 
fake or misleading. Because of this Social Media platforms 
generally have a tendency to amplify fake news.  
 
110. When asked about the algorithms that are most effective in detecting fake news 
and identifying patterns of misinformation, MIB replied as under:- 
“Detecting fake news and identifying patterns of misinformation relating to 
functioning of Government requires use of various mechanisms to verify the 
information from the concerned credible sources in different 

57 
 
Ministries/Departments. Use of AI could be integrated in the fact checking 
processes of FCU and Fact Checkers of the media organizations to augment 
their capabilities”.  
111. On the same issue, Editors Guild of India (EGI) replied as under:- 
“The most effective algorithms for detecting fake news and identifying 
patterns of misinformation include: 
Natural Language Processing (NLP): 
Transformer models (e.g., BERT, GPT): Analyze text structure, sentiment, 
and semantics to identify misleading patterns or inconsistencies. These 
models excel at detecting sensational language and context manipulation. 
Support Vector Machines (SVM): 
Used to classify text into fake or real categories by learning patterns from 
labeled datasets. It's effective in distinguishing between reliable and 
unreliable information based on features like word choice and sentence 
structure. 
Decision Trees and Random Forests: 
These models are used to classify articles based on various textual features 
(e.g., source reliability, keywords). They work well when trained on large 
datasets to identify specific misinformation patterns. 
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN): 
Primarily used in image and video verification to detect manipulated visual 
content. CNNs can analyze pixel -level inconsistencies in images or deepfake 
videos to determine authenticity. 
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and Long Short -Term Memory 
(LSTM): 
These are used for detecting patterns over sequences of text, which helps in 
identifying narrative inconsistencies or misleading timelines in fake news. 
Graph-based Algorithms: 
Graph Neural Networks (GNN) are used to analyze how misinformation 
spreads across social media networks. They identify patterns of coordinated 
campaigns and track the flow of misleading content. 
These algorithms, when combined with human oversight and fact -checking 
efforts, form a robust approach to combating fake news”. 
V. Challenges associated with Fake News crossing international borders 
 
112. On being asked about the challenges associated with Fake News crossing 
international borders, particularly with the rise of global social media platforms, MIB 
submitted as under:- 
“Publishers of news and current affairs on digital media which host news 
relating to India, even if operating from outside the country, are subject to the 
IT Rules, 2021 and direction  for blocking of access of their content falling 
under Section 69A of IT Act in India, can be issued by the Government.   
 
Section 69A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 inter -alia empowers the 
Central Government to issue directions to any Government agency or an 
intermediary to block content in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of 
India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign 
States or public order or for preventing incitement to the commission of any 
cognizable offence relating to such matters.  
 

58 
 
Under the provisions of Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and 
Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 the   Ministry issues directions for 
blocking of content of digital news publishers covered under the provisions of 
Section 69A of Information Technology Act, 2000.  The request for blocking is 
considered as per the laid procedure in the IT Rules, 2021 . The Ministry has 
in the past issued directions under this Section for blocking of access 
of content emanating from foreign jurisdictions in India”.  
 
113. On the same issue, following  are the submissions of Editors Guild of India and 
News Broadcasters and Digital Association:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Organisation/
Stakeholders 
Remarks/Suggestions with respect to challenges 
associated with Fake News crossing international borders  
1.  Editors Guild 
of India (EGI) 
Challenges with Fake News Crossing International Borders: 
Jurisdictional Issues: Different countries have varying laws 
and regulations regarding misinformation, making it difficult to 
enforce global content moderation. 
Language Barriers: Fake news can spread across borders in 
different languages, requiring tailored detection tools that may 
not be universally effective. 
Platform Control: Global platforms like Facebook, X (formerly 
Twitter) and WhatsApp can enable the rapid spread of 
misinformation across borders, but regulating this content 
consistently worldwide is challenging. 
Cultural Differences:  What is considered misinformation in 
one country may be interpreted differently in another, 
complicating the global fight against fake news. 
2.  News 
Broadcasters 
and Digital 
Association 
(NBDA) 
Regulating speech on social media platforms that transcends 
geographical boundaries raises significant challenges from a 
regulatory perspective. It raises issues concerning jurisdiction, 
as the content available on digital platforms can reach multiple 
jurisdictions, each having its own legal requirements and 
issues. The right to freedom of speech and expression varies 
significantly across countries. For instance, in the United 
States of America, the First Amendment explicitly forbids 
Congress from enacting any laws abridging the freedom of 
speech and expression, including that of the press. Therefore, 
any content -based speech regulation in the US is presumed 
invalid, with the burden of proof shifting to the government. 
The Indian Constitution, on the other hand, does not confer an 
absolute right to freedom of speech and expression as it 
envisages reasonable restrictions on eight grounds under 
Article 19(2) that may be placed on the exercise of this right 
by law.  
Even the laws governing intermediaries significantly differ in 
several countries. The US offers more broad immunity to the 
intermediary, allowing them to regulate content on their 
platform as per their own policies, in India, a conditional 
immunity is given to the intermediaries provided they comply 
with the due diligence obligation. 

59 
 
In view of the above, it is clear that globally, there are 
divergent laws, norms and practices for regulating content, 
geopolitical conditions, making transnational regulation of fake 
news difficult. 
 
114. Regarding India’s international collaboration for curbing fake news, MIB replied 
as under:-  
“India is a member of UNESCO.  Department of Higher Education under the 
Central Government has established an Indian National Commission for 
Cooperation (INCCU) with UNESCO having 05 Sub Commissions.  The Sub 
Commission on Communication comes under the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and is chaired by  Secretary (I&B). This Sub Commission 
discusses issues related to mass media, journalist freedom etc. in the 
country. The outcomes of the meeting of Sub Commission on Communication 
forms the basis of India’s position at UNESCO’s General Conference”.  
115. Following are the submission s of EGI and NBDA  on international collaboration 
for curbing Fake News:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Organisation/ 
Stakeholders 
Remarks/Suggestions with respect to international 
collaboration for curbing fake news 
1.  Editors Guild 
of India 
(EGI) 
International Collaboration for Curbing Fake News: 
There are several international initiatives to combat fake news, 
such as the EU's Digital Services Act and UNESCO’s 
guidelines for tackling misinformation. 
India's Role:  India has participated in global discussions on 
misinformation but has not yet fully established binding 
international standards for combating fake news. However, 
India has collaborated with other countries and global tech 
companies to share information and strengthen fact -checking 
efforts. For example, India engages with initiatives like the 
Global Forum for Media Development (GFMD) and IFCN 
(International Fact-Checking Network).] 
2.  News 
Broadcaster
s and Digital 
Association 
(NBDA) 
There are several international collaborations for curbing fake 
news. The Trusted News Initiative (TNI) is an example of such 
collaboration. Founded by the BBC, the initiative is a 
partnership that includes organisations from around the globe 
including; AP, AFP, BBC, CBC/Radio -Canada, European 
Broadcasting Union, Financial Times, Information Futures Lab, 
Google/YouTube, The Hindu, The Nation Media Group, Meta, 
Microsoft, Thomson Reuters, Reuters Institute for the Study of 
Journalism, Twitter, The Washington Post, Kompas – 
Indonesia, Dawn – Pakistan, Indian Express, NDTV – India, 
ABC – Australia, SBS – Australia, NHK – Japan. TNI works 
collectively to find solutions to tackle the problem of 
disinformation and build audience trust. Another example is the 
VERIFIED project which was launched in 2020 by the United 
Nations to combat the increasing spread of COVID -19 
misinformation by increasing the volume and reach of trusted, 
accurate information. VERIFIED works with a range of civil 

60 
 
society groups, media broadcasters, activists and companies 
around the world to help deliver verified information to millions 
of people. 
 
116. When asked to furnish comment s on the Bills/Acts of different countries  in this 
regard, MIB responded as under:- 
(i) UK's Online Safety Act 2023 (OSA): 
The Online Safety Act (the OSA) was enacted on 26 October 2023. It 
establishes an extensive regulatory framework for online user -to-user 
service providers to prevent the proliferation of illegal content and activity 
online and of content and activity that is harmful to children, and to protect 
against fraudulent advertising. 
Main Features:  
(a) All the online platforms will have to show their processes in place to 
meet the requirements set out by the OSA. Ofcom will check how 
effective those processes are at protecting internet users from harm.  
(b) Ofcom will have powers to take action against companies which do 
not follow their new rules. Companies can be fined up to £18 million 
or 10 percent of their annual global turnover (whichever is greater) as 
per the provisions of OSA. Ofcom will also be able to hold companies 
and senior managers (where they are at fault) criminally liable if the 
provider fails to comply with Ofcom’s enforcement notices in relation 
to specific child safety duties or to child sexual abuse and exploitation 
on their service. 
(c) In the most extreme cases, with the agreement of the courts, Ofcom 
will be able to require payment providers, advertisers and internet 
service providers to stop working with a site, preventing it from 
generating money or being accessed from the UK. 
(ii) Singapore’s Online Safety (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act: 
Online Safety (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act was enacted on 1 st 
February 2023 o tackle online harms and strengthen online safety for 
users. 
Main Features of the Act: 
(a) Online communication services will be required to block access by 
Singapore users to such egregious content where directed to do so 
by the Infocomm Media Development Authority (“IMDA”), within a 
stipulated timeline, which would generally be ‘within hours’, and that 
the timeline given will be proportionate to the potential harm of the 
content and will be expedited for more egregious content such as 
terrorism-related content. 
(b) Failure to comply with a blocking direction from the IMDA is an 
offence and may result in a fine of up to SGD 1 million. 
(c) In addition, the IMDA may designate certain online communications 
services as Regulated Online Communication Services (“ROCS”). 
ROCS would be those services with “significant reach”. ROCS will 
be required to comply with additional Online Codes of Practice to be 
issued by IMDA.  

61 
 
117. Commenting on the above Act s, one of the stakeholders stated that both are 
aimed at protecting users, especially children and are not aimed at Fake News 
specifically. 
 
118. On being asked whether, India could emulate any of the international best 
practices related to the regulation of misinformation or ‘Fake News’, one of the 
stakeholders replied as under:- 
“India is unique. Cheap data, which makes almost a billion people connected. 
And low levels of education and awareness. Thus, India should have its own 
law. The French law on Election Misinformation is a good law and could be 
looked at for some aspects”. 
  
VI. Awareness/Training 
 
119. Regarding initiatives of the Ministry  of Information and Broadcasting (MIB)  to 
generate awareness and literacy for identifying/detecting Fake News and reporting the 
same, following was submitted:-  
“The Fact Check Unit under PIB is doing fact checking only in respect of 
information pertaining to the Government.  In order to increase public 
awareness regarding the harmful effects of fake news and sensitize them 
against sharing of unverified information, PIB FCU uses engaging content in 
the form of memes and has also conducted campaigns such as #FACTREE, 
#CyberMonday, etc”. 
 
120. Noting that o ne of the causes of ‘Fake News’ proliferation, as submitted by the 
Ministry, was ‘Lack of Media Literacy’, the Ministry was asked about their  plans for 
creating specific programme for generating and creating awareness amongst common 
man for identifying and taking action against Fake News/content. To this, they replied as 
under:- 
“Media literacy can best be achieved through creating public awareness 
regarding the harmful effects of fake news and sensitize citizens and other 
stakeholders against sharing of unverified information. This can be done 
through appropriate outreach activities for citizen engagement particularly for 
younger generation in association with educational institutions.  
In this regard, the PIB Fact Check Unit has spearheaded several initiatives to 
dispel myths, rumors, and false claims, while providing citizens with accurate 
and reliable information. Key initiatives include: 
1. PIB Factree - In order to create awareness about safe internet practices 
among users, the unit will regularly produce creative infographics related to 
phishing scams, government job scams, financial frauds, fraudulent websites, 
etc. 
2. Crisps Videos  - PIB Fact Check creates short awareness videos to help 
people identify AI -generated images, recognize fake websites, and check if 

62 
 
their phone number is registered under someone else’s name, among other 
topics. 
3. Awareness Posts - PIB Fact Check creates awareness posts on topics 
such as how to spot fake news, how to report online fraud using the Chakshu 
facility, and information about the Cyber Swachhta Kendra and its role in 
promoting digital hygiene. 
121. When asked whether the Ministry was contemplating to create awareness about 
Fake News at school/college level, following reply was submitted:- 
“As far as creating awareness specifically at school/ college level is 
concerned, a broader consultation in this regard needs to be done by all 
concerned including the Ministry of Education and other stakeholders”.  
 
122. On being asked for view points for generating awareness about Fake News at 
school/college level, following suggestions have been received from the stakeholders:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Organisatio
n/Stakehold
ers 
Remarks/Suggestions with respect w.r.t generating 
awareness about Fake News at school/college level  
1.  Editors 
Guild of 
India (EGI) 
Yes, media literacy can and should be integrated into formal 
education curricula to equip students with critical skills to 
navigate misinformation and fake news. 
2.  News 
Broadcaste
rs and 
Digital 
Associatio
n (NBDA) 
According to the National Association for Media Literacy 
Education, media literacy is the ability to use all kinds of 
communication to access, analyze, evaluate, create, and act. 
Understanding underlying messages in web advertisements, 
making viral video content, and detecting native advertising are 
all examples of media literacy. Teaching media literacy should 
not be approached as something that is accomplished in a 
particular class, unit, or grade level. Instead, a comprehensive 
media literacy curriculum should extend throughout a student’s 
entire educational journey and be taught through age and stage 
appropriate activities. At the ground level, the teachers, trainers, 
instructors and educators of primary and secondary schools, 
librarians, should be trained to develop the curriculum and 
guidelines for Media and Information Literacy. This can be done 
by adopting the following mechanisms, viz. identifying fake news; 
evaluating different perspectives by analyzing each source and 
looking for any biases on how the information is presented. 
3.  Hindustan 
Times 
Yes. 
4.  T.V. Today 
Network 
Limited 
Generating awareness about fake news at the school and 
college level is crucial, especially given the increasing 
consumption of digital media among the youth. The Council of 
Europe’s campaign, “Free to Speak, Safe to Learn,” emphasizes 
the importance of early education on identifying and addressing 
misinformation. Schools and colleges must adopt media literacy 
programs that teach students how to critically assess 
information, recognize misinformation, and use tools like reverse 
image searches and fact -checking websites. According to the 

63 
 
campaign, it’s not only about identifying fake news but also about 
fostering a mindset that encourages students to verify sources 
and be responsible digital citizens. By introducing such programs 
at the school and college level, we can ensure that students are 
better equipped to navigate the complexities of the digital 
information landscape. It’s essential to integrate these lessons 
into existing curricula and engage students in activities that 
actively involve them in detecting fake news. These initiatives 
must be tailored to age -appropriate levels and framed carefully 
to avoid spreading scepticism or undue distrust of media 
altogether. In doing so, educational institutions can play a pivotal 
role in creating a well -informed generation capable of critically 
engaging with the digital world. 
5.  Network-
18 
Media literacy would increase the power of evaluation of 
individuals in all demographics to decipher the difference 
between fake news and factually correct news. It might also 
decrease the percentage of fake news being shared through 
public platforms. Media literacy should not be treated as a one -
time lesson or confined to a specific class or grade. Instead, it 
should be an ongoing part of a student’s education, integrated 
through developmentally appropriate activities across all stages 
of learning. 
 
123. Following was submitted by Editors Guild of India ( EGI) on Media literacy during 
evidence:- 
“The second aspect is media literacy. You had already pointed out that the 
Government is devoting resources to media literacy. I think that is a very 
encouraging move. We need to up the efforts of informing the general public 
on what is fake news. Like mutual fund association, the body does a lot of 
campaign on informing about hazards of mutual fund investment and so on in 
health domain and other sensitive domains. I think informing the general 
public on how to identify fake news itself is extremely important. The more 
money the Government can invest, the more it can ask the platform to invest. 
Regarding bodies like the GUILD, NBDA and any other alliances to create 
their own self -regulatory systems, it should be in a manner that there is a 
grievance redressal mechanism and it is a flagging mechanism. It is more of 
their own industry, own ombudsman. The Government should not be a party 
to it whatsoever. There are alliances like the fact -checking unit alliances. 
There is an international fact -checking network which has some guidelines. 
There is a fact -checking alliance in India which operates. I think enabling 
those partnerships is a very welcome move, ensuring that most of the 
partnerships come through, that the media companies itself become party to 
those fact -checking guidelines, enforce those fact -checking guidelines is 
extremely important”. 
124. When suggestions were sought from Press Council of India ( PCI) for generating 
and creating awareness amongst common man for identifying and taking action against 
Fake News/content, they replied as under:- 

64 
 
“To enhance awareness, the PCI carries out sustained Social Media 
campaigns by making regular updates of Norms on its official Social Media 
Handle – X.  
Further, the Council while considering the matter regarding strategies and 
efforts to tackle fake news during its meeting held on 22.09.2022, 
recommended for inclusion of media studies in academic curriculum. 
Accordingly, communication thereupon was sent to the Ministry of Education 
vide letter dated 09.12.2022 for taking necessary action in the matter”. 
125. On the same query, the Hindustan Times, stated that there could be an 
awareness campaign on Fake News, with a strong emphasis on social media. 
126. Regarding the need for training or for awareness programs to help journalists 
identify and avoid the publication of ‘Fake News’, following response was received from 
News Broadcasters and Digital Association (NBDA):- 
“Yes, there is a need for training or awareness programs to help journalists 
identify and avoid the publication of ‘Fake News’. Regarding the steps to be 
taken thereof, the Council while considering the matter regarding strategies 
and efforts to tackle fake news during its meeting held on 22.09.2022, made 
recommendations. 
Encouraging media literacy is the most recommended countermeasure 
against fake news. Media Literacy is a learning process, which aims to 
develop and encourage critical thinking skills. While there can be many 
diverse approaches towards infusing media literacy, the common objective of 
these approaches should be to raise awareness amongst the citizens and 
thereby critical analysis skills about the media industry, the journalistic 
practices, known media manipulation techniques, the independent -industry-
led self-regulatory mechanisms and increase familiarity with technology.  
To realise the full potential of media literacy a collaborative approach is 
required, wherein all stakeholders contribute towards media literacy. Even 
Ofcom in its Three -Year Media Literacy Strategy has underscored the 
importance of collaboration involving collective effort of everyone from online 
platforms, parents, educators, third -sector organisations to broadcasters and 
others in advancing media literacy.  
Further, it is also important to bear in mind that with evolving technology and 
media formats, there can be no single effective approach for achieving media 
literacy across different age groups and demographics and that media literacy 
is a lifelong process.  
Therefore, the focus should not be on finding the most effective method of 
teaching media literacy rather the focus of any media literacy programmes 
should be on ensuring wide engagement and reach.  
FactShala is a successful example of an organization running multiple media 
literacy programmes based on different objectives. FactShala was launched 
by Internews in collaboration with DataLEADS and financial support from 
Google.org and Google News Initiative.  The organization has several 
initiatives to promote media literacy, which are given herein below: 
 
i. Train-the-trainer  
ii. University Network Programme  
iii. FactShala Zonal Hub  

65 
 
iv. FactShala Innovation Lab.  
 
127. On the same query, the Hindustan Times, submitted as under:- 
“Yes. Regular workshops, especially dealing with new technologies used in 
Fake News are important. Maybe MIB can coordinate these”. 
 
 
VII. Miscellaneous  
 
128. When asked  about the plan s for making intermediary platforms to take 
appropriate steps to remove ‘Fake News’ from their platforms on their own, the Ministry 
replied as under:- 
“The Government as a general policy does not interfere with reporting of 
news across media and hence it may not be appropriate to have a direct role 
for the Government in monitoring of fake news as it simply means monitoring 
of all news. It is felt that the monitoring of fake news can best be addressed 
by the self-regulatory mechanism of the industry stakeholders.  
 
However, Ministry has existing mechanism under Part -II of IT Rules, 2021 
which cast obligation on intermediary platforms like YouTube, Facebook, etc 
to make reasonable efforts by itself and to cause the user of their computer 
resource to not host, display, upload, modify, publish, transmit, etc. knowingly 
and intentionally any information which is obscene, pornographic, 
paedophilic, invasive of another’s privacy, including bodily privacy, insulting or 
harassing on the basis of gender, racially or ethnically objectionable, or that is 
harmful to child and any information which is patently false and untrue, and is 
written and published in any form with the intent to mislead or harass a 
person, entity or agency for financial gain or to cause any injury to any 
person”. 
 
129. On being asked as to what could be done to make social media and YouTube 
Channels to make more accountable w.r.t running Fake content/News, the following 
was submitted by EGI:- 
“To make social media platforms and YouTube channels more accountable 
for fake content/news: 
Transparency and Reporting: 
Mandate transparency reports detailing content moderation practices and 
actions taken against fake news. 
Strengthen Content Moderation: 
Require platforms to adopt robust AI tools and partner with independent fact-
checkers to identify and flag fake content. 
User Reporting Mechanisms: 
Ensure platforms have accessible tools for users to report misinformation, 
with clear timelines for response. 
Algorithmic Accountability: 
Enforce transparency in algorithms to prevent the promotion of fake content 
and encourage the prioritization of credible sources. 
Graduated Penalties: 
Introduce stricter fines and penalties for repeat violations, scaling up for 
platforms or channels consistently spreading fake news. 

66 
 
Independent Oversight: 
Establish independent regulatory bodies to audit and review content 
moderation policies and practices regularly. 
These measures would encourage responsibility while preserving free 
expression”. 
 
130. Suggestions provided by Network -18 for curbing ‘Fake News’ in Print and Digital 
Media/Social media are as under:- 
“With most news now consumed via mobile apps and social media, certain 
technological and procedural integrations can have positive impact on 
conduct of misinformation on these platforms. To counter this, social media 
platforms must partner with independent fact -checkers to verify content and 
promote credible, well -sourced information. This can be the replication of 
editorial ethics to assure correct information is distributed with the public. 
Each social media platform has its own set of rules or guidelines, which can 
vary from one platform to another. These guidelines govern how the platform 
operates and how it handles user content, but they differ depending on the 
platform. To address the issue of fake news, social media platforms can 
leverage their unique set of rules and guidelines, along with technological 
tools, to curb the spread of misinformation.  
Each social media platform can implement strict content moderation policies 
that specifically target misinformation”.  
131. The Ministry were asked to provide comment on NBDA’s statement that there is 
a need to think through the word 'safe harbour’. To this, the Ministry replied as under:-  
“Section 79 of the IT Act, 2000 provides for exemption from liability of 
intermediary, subject to certain safeguards, for any third -party information, 
data, or communication link made available or hosted by him. The exemption 
from liability is commonly called as ‘safe harbour’. 
 
Sub-section (2) of Section 79 provides that the safe harbour provision shall 
apply if– 
a) the function of the intermediary is limited to providing access to a 
communication system over 
b) which information made available by third parties is transmitted or 
temporarily stored or hosted; or 
c) the intermediary does not– 
i. initiate the transmission, 
ii. select the receiver of the transmission, and 
iii. select or modify the information contained in the transmission; 
d) the intermediary observes due diligence while discharging his duties 
under this Act and also observes such other guidelines as the Central 
Government may prescribe in this behalf. 
Sub-section (3) provides that the safe harbor shall not apply if– 
a) the intermediary has conspired or abetted or aided or induced, whether 
by threats or promise or otherwise in the commission of the unlawful 
act; 
b) upon receiving actual knowledge, or on being notified by the 
appropriate Government or its agency that any information, data or 
communication link residing in or connected to a computer resource 

67 
 
controlled by the intermediary is being used to commit the unlawful act, 
the intermediary fails to expeditiously remove or disable access to that 
material on that resource without vitiating the evidence in any manner. 
Rule 3(1) of the IT Rules, 2021  provides for due diligence to be observed by 
an intermediary. In this context, sub -rule (d) of rule 3(1) relates to section 
79(3)(b) of the IT Act and provides that an intermediary shall not host, 
store, or publish any unlawful information upon receiving actual 
knowledge in the form of an order by a court of competent jurisdiction 
or being notified by the Appropriate Government  or its agency under 
section 79(3)(b) of the IT Act. This includes information prohibited under any 
law for the time being in force concerning the sovereignty and integrity of 
India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public 
order, decency, morality, contempt of court, defamation, or incitement to an 
offense relating to these areas. Upon receiving such a court order or 
notification, the intermediary shall remove or disable access to the unlawful 
information within thirty-six hours. 
 
Rule 7 of the IT Rules, 2021  provides that where an intermediary fails to 
observe the IT Rules, the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 79 of the Act 
shall not be applicable to such intermediary and the intermediary shall be 
liable for punishment under any law for the time being in force, 
including the provisions of the IT Act and the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita. 
Thus, failure to remove unlawful information can lead to loss of safe harbour 
for the intermediary, and it shall then be directly liable for the offense being 
committed by the unlawful content”. 
 
 
132. When asked for the Ministry's views on 'Safe Harbour' provisions used by 
intermediaries and the way they can be made more accountable, they replied as under:- 
“Most of the digital news publishers  are on major social media intermediary 
platforms like YouTube, Facebook, Instagram etc. The revenue model of such 
platforms is such that the sensational and potentially fake content gets more 
traction on such platforms and the algorithms of such platform further 
amplifies such content. This is a vicious cycle and often lead to virality of fake 
news. On the other hand the intermediary platforms enjoy immunity from the 
third party liability of content posted on their platforms by users under Section 
79 of IT Act, 2000, subject to complying with certain due diligence.  In order to 
check the menace of fake news the due diligence for the intermediary 
platforms could be revisited requiring them to take appropriate steps to 
remove fake news from their platforms on their own. This will take away the 
incentives for the publishers of fake news on such platforms. 
In this regard Hon’ble Minister of Information and Broadcasting (HMIB) while  
speaking on the occasion of 'National Press Day 2024 on 16th November, 
2024, while calling for accountability in digital media to combat fake news and 
safeguard democracy, had suggested that in view of the changing media 
landscape and India's diverse cultural and social context there is a need for 
revisiting the 'Safe Harbour' provision for the social media intermediaries.  
HMIB pointed out that algorithms driving digital platforms prioritise content 
that maximises engagement, incites strong reactions and, thereby, defines 
the revenue for the platform. These often amplify sensational or divisive 
narratives. Since such biases have social consequences, particularly in a 

68 
 
diverse nation like India, there is a need for platforms to come up with 
solutions to eliminate such biases”.  
 
133. With respect to ‘Safe Harbour’ clause of ‘IT Rule, 2021’, Hindustan Times stated 
that the ‘safe harbour’ protection should be removed. On the same issue, Network -18 
submitted are as under:- 
“Section 79 of the IT Act grants safe harbour protection to intermediaries, 
shielding them from liability. Removing this provision could lead to increased 
censorship on these intermediaries, particularly social media platforms. 
 
The safe harbour provision under Section 79 is essential for intermediaries, 
as long as they don't initiate, select the recipients, or modify the information 
being transmitted. However, issues arise when major tech companies use 
algorithms to boost user engagement and increase ad revenue, inadvertently 
promoting the spread of fake news. To address this, promoting transparency 
in algorithms might be crucial to prevent the circulation of misinformation. 
 
Social media platforms, leveraging their technological capabilities, can 
efficiently detect and eliminate bot accounts that spread misinformation. 
Algorithms should prioritize credible, verified content over mere engagement 
metrics to combat the spread of AI-generated fake news. 
 
134. Sharing his view point on role of Big Tech companies and in Fake News, the 
representative of NDTV, during evidence, submitted:- 
“बबग  टेक  की  िच्चाई र्ह है कक  हम क ुछ नहीं  कर  िकते  हैं। वह  िरकारों के  ऊपर है। र्ूके 
का  Ofcom हो, चाहे एफिीिी ऑफ अमेररका हो, चाहे सिंगापुर हो र्ा चाहे ऑस्रेसलर्ा हो, वे  
िब  इििे िंघर्ा कर  रहे हैं। जब  तक  कोई  एक  बड़ी  िरकार, बड़े  जज्बे के  िाथ एग्रीगेटर को  
र्ह नहीं  बोलेगी  कक  मैं आपको  पक्ललशर की  तरह रीट करंगा  र्ा जैिे अभी आपने  ररटवेस्ट 
कर  िी और उन्होंने र्ूट्र्ूब  के  चैनल्ि हटा दिए, उि प्रकार िे अगर र्े एनफोिामेंट मजब ूत 
नहीं  होंगे तो गंगोत्री बंि नहीं  होगी। जब  तक  गंगोत्री बंि नहीं  होगी, चूूँकक  हम लोगों  िे 
गलनतर्ां होती है, लेककन  हम छोटे िोर्ी हैं। इंडिवव जुअल्ि बड़े  िोर्ी हैं।  
िूिरा, मैं आपको  िेबी  के  उिाहरण िे एटिप्लेन करना  चाहूंगा कक  फाइनेंसशर्ल इंफ्ल ुएंिर 
माकेट  में शेर्र बाजार को  लेकर  क ुछ भी कहते  जा रहे थे। इनका  कोई  रेगुल ेशन  नहीं  था। 
जब  िेिा गर्ा कक  ग्रे रेगुल ेटरी एररर्ा है तो िेबी  ने  आकर  कहा  कक  अगर आप एिवाइि िे 
रहे हैं तो अपने  आपको  रक्जस्टिा कीक्जए। जैिे हम लाइिेंि  िे बंधे  हुए है, उिी तरीके  िे 
आप कक्रएटिा का  र्ा इंफ्ल ुएंििा का  टर्ा करेंगे ? इिका  एक  िमाधान  िरकार को  ढूंढन ा 
चादहए। आपकी  िसमनत इि पर जादहर तौर पर क ुछ अच्छे िुझाव  िे िकती  है”।  
 
135. On a related issue, the Indian Express during evidence, submitted following:- 
“I want to stick my neck out and say none of us in this room makes fake 
news. This is not the source of fake news as you yourself said in statistics 
that mainstream media does not make fake news. One big reason is and I am 
not saying that we are doing a wonderful job. We need to do a better job, but 
you know us. You know our name, our phone numbers, our company 
addresses, our income tax returns, our company file, etc. So, you know us  

69 
 
inside…xxx.xxx…We are not a black box. You can find out who the director or 
the owner or the editor of Indian Express is. Everything is in the public 
domain. It is much easier. If we do some fake news, you can call us and say 
‘this is wrong’. It is those who are in a black box and that is where big 
technologies companies come in. Everyone of us needs Facebook, Google 
etc. Ninety per cent of people who read the Indian Express read it on their 
phones. They go to Google. We don’t know how a story reaches them. It is a 
black box. We don’t understand why one story can reach 400 people and 
another story reaches 4,000 people or four million people. These are black 
boxes. So, my second point is to engage with big technology companies and 
see what they are doing. They share and disseminate; they may not upload. 
They don’t write the story but they play a very big role in sharing what we call 
fake news. I am using the words ‘fake news’ here since that is the subject and 
that is the term being used”.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Introductory 
 
1. With advancement in technology, dissemination of ‘Fake 
News’/misinformation is not only through the mainstream media (newspapers, 
TV) but also largely through digital news media and user -generated content on 
social media (X, YouTube etc). Spread of ‘Fake News’, though not unknown, is 
magnified with the onset of electronic media, proliferation of digital platforms and 
widespread use of social media.  In the last decade and a half, almost every 
individual has become a purveyor of news/information and the conventional 
safeguards of editorial control have become  almost non-existent. Consequently, 
there has been a massive proliferation of ‘Fake News’ and misinformation. 
Unchecked spread of misinformation in general and ‘Fake News’ in particular, 
have emerged as a global challenge as it pose a serious threat to (a) Public order 
- triggering strong emotional sentiments  and confusion ; (b) Democratic 
processes; (c) Individual reputation (defamation) ; (d) Insider trading/prices of the 
stock market ; and (e) Credibility of media etc. G iven the ongoing digital 
revolution and the rise in usage of digital devices in the Country, ‘Fake News’ is 
undoubtedly becoming a matter of concern.   
 
The Committee note that there are myriad complex and inter-related factors 
that contribute to the spread of ‘Fake News’ and misinformation due to reasons 
which, inter-alia, include (i) Low level of digital and media literacy ; (ii) Rise of 
social media platforms ; (iii) Technological developments ; (iv) Political 
polarization and specific agendas of some individuals , parties  or groups (to 
influence public opinion) ; (v) Financial Incentives (fabricated sensational stories 
attract more clicks and generate followers and advertising revenue for the 
creators); (vi) Algorithms that promote/amplify viral and sensational content ; (vii) 
Technologies like Bots amplifying false information, cognitive biases, 
manipulation through AI-generated deepfakes, etc.   
 
Recognizing the impact and challenges associated with ‘Fake News', the 
Committee felt the need to review and assess the effectiveness of the existing 
mechanisms to curb its menace.  In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee 
after detailed examination of the subject have made their 

71 
 
Observations/Recommendations on the existing regulatory/institutional 
frameworks/ mechanisms for addressing the issues related to ‘Fake News’. The 
Committee feel that the issue requires a multi -faceted approach and combined 
efforts by individuals, Governments, Print as well as electronic media digital 
media growing and social media platforms in curbing the menace. The 
Government through various initiatives like Regulatory Framework, Fact 
Checking Initiatives, Technology Collaborations, Public Awareness campaigns 
and Media literacy would be able to tackle  the spread of  Fake News.  The 
Committee desire that the hazards of ‘Fake News’/misinformation need to be 
prevented so as to avoid misleading of common people, mental trauma to victims 
and in maintaining the credibility and freedom of  all forms of  Media.  The 
Committee recommend the Ministry to act in right earnest through robust and 
comprehensive approach and provide details of the time bound action taken to 
address all the issues highlighted in the Report.  
 
Need for defining ‘Fake News’ 
2. The Committee during the course of evidence found that the term ‘Fake 
News’ has not been defined under any statute. However, according to the Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, Fake News  is commonly understood as 
information which is false or misleading and presented as news. According to 
one of the Stakeholders, ‘Fake News’ is generally used to describe fabricated and 
factually inaccurate information and the term is so ambiguous that it inaccurately 
subsumes within its fold “satire”, “opinions”, “criticism”, “clickbait reporting”, 
“biased reporting”, “motivated propaganda” etc., and the term may also be used 
to target and delegitimize the media. During examination of the subject, the 
Stakeholders apprised of the Committee  that there is no uniform and clear 
definition for ‘Fake news’ which is being followed worldwide. According to the 
stakeholder(s), the polysemic nature of ‘Fake News’ makes it difficult to define 
and identify.  Since the definitive principles cannot be established, ‘Fake News’ 
cannot be defined precisely and definitively and therefore results in vagueness 
and makes it susceptible to grave abuse and misuse. However, some of the 
Stakeholders suggested that there is a need for defining the term ‘Fake News’ as 
it is crucial to any discussion for its regulation. Definitions for Fake News,  as 
proposed by some of the Stakeholders are:- 

72 
 
i. ‘Fake News’ means news, story, information, data and reports 
which is or are wholly or partly false;  
ii. Fake news - Deliberately fabricated or manipulated content 
disseminated with the intent to mislead or harm; 
iii. False reports or Mis- or disinformation that could take the form of 
articles, photographs, video clips, which are disguised as real 
news, and which are aimed at fooling people or manipulating their 
opinion. The most important parameters in this are that these are 
‘disguised as real news’ and are ‘aimed at fooling people or 
manipulating opinions’; 
iv. ‘Fake News’ shall mean any false, misleading, or distorted 
information created, disseminated or amplified with the intention 
to deceive the public and meets all the following criteria: (a) It 
presents itself as containing factual assertions about events, 
individuals, entities, or phenomena excluding opinions, satire, or 
parody clearly identifiable as such; and (b) The information has 
the capacity to significantly mislead a reasonable person, based 
on objective evidence or the lack thereof; and  (c) The 
dissemination of such information that has the potential to cause 
harm, including but not limited to: (i) incitement to violence, 
hatred, or discrimination; (ii) disruption of public order or safety; 
(iii) undermining the integrity of democratic processes; (iv) 
causing significant harm to the reputation of individuals or 
entities; or (v) endangering public health. 
In the light of the ambiguity related to the term misinformation/fake news, 
the Committee feel that there is a need for defining the term ‘Fake News’ per se in 
a subtle manner  and incorporate suitable clauses in the existing regulatory 
mechanism for print, electronics and digital media  while maintaining the delicate 
balance of combating misinformation and protecting freedom of speech and 
individual rights as guaranteed under  the Constitution. The Committee also 
caution the Ministry to consider all the dimensions and parameters related to the 
term in consultation with the Stakeholders while arriving at its definition. The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this direction. 
Regulatory Mechanism for curbing Fake News 
3. The Committee note that the objective of the Fact Check Unit under Press 
Information Bureau (PIB) is to counter dissemination of fake news and 
misinformation pertaining to the Government of India and to provide people with 
an easy avenue to report suspicious and questionable information for fact -
checking by following FACT model (Find, Assess, Create and Target). The 
Committee also note that for Print Media - the newspapers have to adhere to 

73 
 
‘Norms of Journalistic Conduct’ brought out by Press Council of India (PCI).   So 
far as the  contents shown on TV Channels there is Programme Code under the 
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995,  are concerned it , inter-alia, 
provide that no content which contain anything obscene, defamatory, deliberate, 
false and suggestive innuendos and half -truth is broadcast on private satellite TV 
channels. Besides, TV channels are also required to follow ‘The Cable Television 
Network (Amendment) Rules 2021’. For Digital News Publishers, ‘Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021’ 
(‘IT Rules, 2021’) provide for a Code of Ethics for the publishers of news and 
current affairs on digital media, which, inter-alia, requires adherence to the Norms 
of Journalistic Conduct brought out by PCI and the Programme Code under Cable 
Television Network Regulation Act, 1995. The Rules provide for a Three Tier 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism   to look into complaints relating to violation of 
the Code. However, Rule 9 (i) relating to adherence of the Code of Ethics  by the 
publishers of news and current affairs on digital media and OTT platforms; and 
Rule 9(3) relating to the three level grievance redressal mechanism,  have been 
stayed by the Bombay High Court vide their interim order dated 14.8.2021.   
The complaints relating to fake news received in the Ministry are forwarded 
to the concerned news publishers, at Level -I of the Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism, for appropriate action under the IT Rules, 2021. The Ministry takes 
appropriate action against circulation of fake news as per the provisions of the 
institutional mechanism that are available for various media platforms. However, 
the Committee have been informed that  in order to augment the effectiveness of 
the efforts to check the spread of fake news there is a n urgent need for defining 
fake news and incorporating it in the existing regulatory mechanisms of print, 
electronic and digital media along with appropriate deterrent measures. 
While responding about the strength of existing legislative provisions and 
mechanisms to tackle the menace of Fake News, some of the stakeholders have 
submitted that they are adequate. However, according to some of the 
stakeholders it is not adequate in terms of the fact that intermediaries, content 
providers and social media platforms are not covered by the law.  The Committee 
understand that digital media does not fall only under the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting (MIB). Regulation of digital as well as social media is a multi -

74 
 
pronged effort, with distinct roles played by the MIB and MeitY, especially under 
the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021. It is beyond doubt that IT rules, 2021, divide digital media 
regulation between two Ministries. MIB (Part III) administers the Code of Ethics 
and three -tier grievance redressed mechanism for content published by digital 
news portals and (Over -The-Top) OTT streaming platforms. MeitY (Part II) 
oversees social media intermediaries and regulates user -generated content on 
platforms like You Tube, Facebook and X (formerly Twitter). Since digital media 
operates on Information Technology platforms, MeitY’s policies regarding 
cybersecurity and broader IT Act, 2000, provide overarching framework. The 
Committee, therefore, urge upon the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to 
augment their concerted efforts, in effectively dealing with the challenges and 
problems created by Fake News in digital as well as social media platforms, in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. In 
order to strengthen the Press Council of India Online Complaint Portal like 
CPGRAM should be developed. Similarly, there is a need to strengthen the Press 
Council of India. The Committee expect the Ministry to explore the option of 
having an independent centralized monitoring body with representatives from  
MeitY, all the forms of Media and stakeholders for adjudicating cross -platform 
fake news cases and recommend penalties. Further, since PCI has submitted that 
there is a need for amending the existing Acts/Rules/Guidelines related to Print 
Media for tackling the issue of ‘Fake News’, the Committee recommend the 
Ministry to set up the Committee of experts to suggest amendments in existing 
Acts/Rules/Guidelines like ‘IT Act, 2000’, ‘The Cable Television Network 
(Regulation) Act 19 95, etc. to address the misinformation or the fake news 
effectively. The Committee would like to be apprised of the views of the Ministry 
and action, initiated in this regard. 
 
Role of Self-Regulatory Mechanism in curbing Fake News 
4. The Committee note that there are 919 TV channels permitted by MIB (as on 
30.11.2024). Out of this, 318 TV channels are members of Broadcasting Content 
Complaints Council (BCCC) and 58 are members with News Broadcasters 
Federation - Professional News Broadcasting Standards Authority" (NBF -
PNBSA). While noting that 543 Channels were not members with any Self 

75 
 
Regulatory Body (SRB), the Committee wanted to know from the Ministry as to 
how they could be made part of one or the other SRB. To this, the Ministry 
informed that in order to ensure accountability of Broadcasters which are not 
affiliated with any SRB and to secure effective implementation of the three -tier 
grievance redressal mechanism, MIB have introduced a condition that may be 
included in the uplinking/downlinking permissions for satellite TV channels 
mandating broadcasters to either join an SRB registered with the Ministry or 
establish their own SRB and get it registered with them. Details in this regard, the 
Ministry had communicated to the Broadcasters on 30.05.2023. NBDA, informed 
the Committee that when the TV channels find that they are under regulation, they 
prefer not to be a member and in such a situation NBDA has no control over it. 
Against this backdrop, they have been requesting the Ministry, for almost  last 16 
years, that whether channels are members or not, they should be brought under 
the purview of NBDA and regulated by the Self -Regulation Body that MIB have 
created. The Committee are also given to understand that the Ministry has not 
received any request from NBDA for registration as a self -regulatory body at level 
–II under Rule 18 (2) of CTN Rules, 2021. 
While acknowledging the support of most of the Stakeholders for Self -
Regulatory Monitoring Mechanism to curb Fake News, the Committee feel that for 
making the system of Self -regulatory mechanism effective, all TV channels 
should be brought under its umbrella.  While endorsing the suggestion of NBDA, 
the Committee appreciate the Ministry’s initiative for inclusion of the condition in 
the uplinking/downlinking permissions for satellite TV channels mandating 
Broadcasters to either join an SRB registered with the Ministry or establish their 
own SRB and get it registered with them. The Committee are also of the view that 
having a fact checking mechanism and internal Ombudsman in almost all the 
media organisations will go a long way in strengthening the role of Self 
Regulatory mechanism and checking the menace of misinformation/Fake News. 
The Committee desire the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to ensure that 
fact checking mechanism and internal ombudsman should be made mandatory in 
all print, digital and electronic media organisations of the country. 
 

76 
 
Organizations/ Mechanism involved in Fact Checking 
5. The Committee note that apart from the Fact Check Unit (FCU) of the Press 
Information Bureau (PIB), there are several other organizations that are actively 
involved in monitoring Fake News and related issues in India. These include both 
independent organizations, collaborative initiatives with digital platforms, fact -
checking agencies, and media organizations. The Committee were also given to 
understand that some organizations use tools to find visually similar images 
online as well as data bases maintained by International Fact Checking Network, 
etc., for checking the veracity of the information. The Committee note that despite 
the fact that there are so many independent fact -checkers, fact -check 
organizations and Fact Check Units of Media organisations, yet they work in 
isolation. Since no single organization, Government or Private, have the capacity 
to cross check and handle the  large volume of fake news, the Committee are of 
the opinion that a collaborative effort among all the stakeholders to develop tools 
and technology for detecting Fake News/Misinformation would play a crucial role 
in curbing Fake News. The Ministry may apprise  of the Committee  about the 
action taken in this regard . Further, while noting the submission of MIB, that 
giving FCU (under PIB)  a statutory basis is necessary for checking Fake News 
relating to the plans, programmes and initiatives of the Government, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to explore its feasibility and apprise them 
about the same. 
Cases related to Fake News  
6. The Committee were apprised that there was a Fact Check Unit under Press 
Information Bureau (PIB). But that PIB Fact Check Unit does not maintain data 
with respect to fake news separately for each of the three  media platforms viz 
Print, Electronics, and Digital.  As per the submissions, it is seen that a total of 
1,63,597 queries were received from 2nd April 2020 to 30th April 2025, out of which 
only 53,155 were found to be relevant and suitable action was taken thereon. With 
respect to details of the cases  of ‘Fake News’ handled by MIB in last 5 years, the 
Ministry informed that the term 'Fake News' is not explicitly  defined under the 
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 and the Rules framed 
thereunder. However, Rule 6(1)(d) of the Programme Code under CTN Rules, 1994 

77 
 
provides that ‘No programme should be carried in cable service which contains 
anything obscene, defamatory, deliberate, false and suggestive innuendos and 
half truths’. During the last five years action was taken against broadcasters in 21 
cases for violating Rule 6(1)(d) along with other provisions of Programme Code. 
With respect to Print Media, an analysis of the cases filed under Section -13 of the 
PCI Act for the last 3 years revealed that the number of cases filed during the year 
2022–23 were 273 and the cases adjudicated were 11. Similarly, during the year 
2023–24, it was 212 and 63, respectively and during the year 2024 -25 they were 
210 and 46, respectively.  Further, an analysis of the cases filed under Section -14 
of the PCI Act for the last 3 years revealed that number of cases filed during the 
year 2022 –23 were 865 and the cases adjudicated were 29 whereas during the 
year 2023 –24 they were 775 and 103 , respectively and during the year 2024 -25 
they were 898 and 41, respectively.  When asked to explain the reasons for lesser 
number of cases being adjudicated against those filed actually, the Ministry 
informed that during COVID Pandemic regular meetings of the Council could not 
be held. Further, the position of the Chairperson, Press Council of India was 
vacant from 21.11.2021 to 16.06.2022, due to which no meeting took place.  The re-
constitution of the 15 th term Council was under way as the 14 th term ended on 
October 5, 2024 and this has resulted in a backlog of cases. The Committee urge 
upon the Ministry to appoint Chairperson of the Press Council of India as soon as 
the vacancy arise in future. 
Further with respect to electronic media, an analysis of the action taken on 
matter against Private Satellite TV Channels during 2019 -2025 reveal that the 
number of cases have reduced over the years from 101 to 4. During the year, 2025 
(till 29.04.2025), there was only 01 case. With respect to Digital News Publishers, 
the Committee note that the Government has notified the Information Technology 
(Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 under 
Information Technology Act, 2000 on 25 th February, 2021, which , inter-alia, 
provides for a Code of Ethics for adherence by digital news publishers and also a 
three-tier mechanism for redressal of grievance s relating to Code of Ethics by 
them.  Besides, Section 69A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 , inter-alia, 
empowers the Central Government to issue directions to any Government agency 
or an intermediary to block content in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of 

78 
 
India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States 
or public order or for preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable 
offence relating to such matters. The request for blocking is considered as per 
the laid down procedure in the IT Rules, 2021. The Committee have been informed 
that 15 Writ Petitions have been filed in various High Courts challenging the 
maintainability of the Rules. Hon’ble Supreme Court vide order dated 22.03.2024 
transferred all 15 Writ Petitions to Delhi High Court for further hearing.  While 
noting the plans/proposal of the Ministry to reduce backlog, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to ensure frequent  meetings of  Inquiry Committee to 
hear cases and fix a time limit to clear pendency on a fast -track mode and also do 
categorise backlog items in order to expedite their disposal. The Ministry may 
apprise of the Committee about the outcome of the action taken in this regard. 
Penal Provisions related to Fake News  
 
7. While examining the penal provisions that were prevalent for 
telecasting/printing Fake News, the Committee note that it varied for each Media. 
For Print Media - upon being found guilty the Press Council of India (PCI) could 
warn, admonish, censure and disapprove the conduct of the journalist(s). For 
Electronic Media (private satellite TV channels) penal actions for proven cases of 
violation of Programme and Advertising Code include advising, warning, 
censuring, admonishing or reprimanding such broa dcaster/requiring an apology, 
or content removal or taking the channel/programme off -air for a specified time 
period. Digital Media being governed by IT Act/Rules allows for mild penalties like 
₹25,000 and blocking under Section 69A.  
The Ministry has info rmed that in the absence of a clear definition of ‘Fake 
News’ and specific provisions in the rules governing content of different media 
verticals there is no penal provision specific to publication of fake news. The 
Committee were also informed by one of the Stakeholder s that currently there is 
no uniform code on this and there is a need for developing a consensus -driven 
code, along with appropriate measures to punish acts of publishing Fake News 
deliberately. It was also stated that these punitive actions should be in the civil 
domain, with no need for criminal action. Besides, the amount of monetary fine is 
to be determined keeping in view various factors - like the size of the publishing 
entity, its reach, recurrence of action, and the gravity or potential harm.  As far as 

79 
 
the Members of NBDA are concerned, Regulation 7 of the News Broadcasting & 
Digital Standards Regulations confer on NBDSA the power to impose penalties 
for violation of the Code of Conduct by the Broadcaster or Digital Publisher and it 
includes; for the first violation issue/express – (a) warning, admonishment, 
censure, disapproval, regret, apology and/or (b) impose a fine of upto Rs. 2 la khs 
and this keeps increasing in case of second ( Rs 5 lakhs), third (Rs 10 lakhs) and 
for fourth violation wherein the fine is upto 1% of the total annual turnover of the 
channel, provided such fine shall not exceed Rs. 25 lakhs. 
On a related issue, some of the stakeholders submitted that there needs to 
be a variation in penalty for repeated offenders, whic h may vary from warning -
apology-fine-suspension-to complete blocking/taking the channel off Air. It has 
also been noted that there are graded penalty system for different forms of media, 
ranging from mild warning to levying fines culminating upto ₹25 lakh and license 
revocation. The Committee are of the opinion that the amount of fine can be 
increased so as to make it deterrent enough for creators/ publishers of fake news. 
The Committee desire that there is a need for clearly assigning accountability of 
Editors/Content heads for editorial control; of Owners/Publishers for institutional 
failures, of Intermediaries/Platforms, etc., for peddling ‘Fake News’. There is also 
a need to amen d the penal provisions for publishing/telecasting Fake News in 
relevant Act/Rules/Guidelines for each form of Media (print, Electronic, Digital).  
The Ministry may explore the feasibility of cancelling the accreditation of a 
journalist/creator who is found guilty of creating  and/or propagating 'Fake News’. 
Needless to say, all these should involve and emerge from a consensus -building 
exercise among media bodies and the relevant stakeholders.  
 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
8. With respect to Grievance Redressal mechanism, the Ministry have 
informed that there are various statutory and institutional mechanisms available 
to address the menace of fake news, on various media platforms viz. print media, 
electronic media and digital media . For grievances related to Print Media any 
citizen can complain against a newspaper for carrying content that is violative of 
the Norms of Journalistic Conduct. A complainant can also submit a complaint to 
the PCI on Centralised Public Grievance Redr ess and Monitoring System 
(CPGRAM) of the Government. For Electronic Media, the Rule under the Cable 
Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 2021 provide for a three -level complaint 
redressal structure. The procedure for Digital Media under the Information 

80 
 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 
provides for a three -level institutional framework for redressal of grievances 
related to the violation of Code of Ethics by news publishers on digital media and 
OTT platforms. People can also report fake news to PIB Fact Check Unit via the 
various mechanisms which include (i) WhatsApp Hotline: Users can send 
messages to the dedicated number at +918799711259 to report suspicious 
information or request fact -checking; (ii) Email: Individuals can also send their 
queries or reports via email to socialmedia.pib.gov.in; (iii) The public can also 
visit the official PIB Fact Check portal at https://factcheck.pib.gov.in/ to report or 
request verification of potential fake news. These platforms allow users to easily 
submit information for fact-checking and help in addressing misinformation.   
With respect to grievance redressal mechanism for AI -generated videos, 
one of the Stakeholders informed that according to the law fake videos must be 
removed within 36 to 42 hours, but no one removes them. They are in circulation, 
but no action is taken and out of 15 -20 videos only two or three get removed. In 
the meantime, these videos get millions of views as they do not have ways to 
stop them. Even Police have no mechanism to hold anyone responsible for these 
videos as they are sometimes generated outside the Country. Considering the 
damage inflicted by Fake News in a short span of time, the Ministry was asked 
about the need to re -visit the process especially w.r.t the time taken to dispose 
off the case/to take action against a Channel/portal/ print media . To this, they 
informed that the time limit for handling of grievances at various levels of the 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism in respect of the content of broadcasters has 
been prescribed keeping in view the principles of natural justice and taking into 
account the time required for processing of such grievance at these levels. 
Further, with respect to time taken to settle the complaint, the Committee 
note that there is no time limit prescribed for Press Council of India to act on 
complaints and according to PCI such a time limit may be recommended, giving 
exception for procedural delays. Further, under PCI Act, the Complainant is 
required to comply with mandatory requirements under Regulation (3) of Press 
Council (Procedure for Inquiry) Regulation, 1979 within four (4) weeks. The 
Committee also note that currently, there is no me chanism to digitally track and 
notify complainants about the progress of the complaints in PCI. However, while 

81 
 
appreciating the fact that PCI is in process of developing complaint mechanism 
software with online complaint submission and tracking facility, the Committee 
would like to be kept apprised of the same. Further, while noting the prevalent 
situation with respect viral videos of fake news, the Committee urge the Ministry 
to formulate concrete Time -Bound Grievance Redressal Framework and 
implement digital tracking system of the grievances/complaints on the lines of 
PCI initiative. The Ministry may also look into the feasibility of the following and 
apprise the Committee accordingly: 
(i) Prescribe a time limit for PCI Complaint Resolution Mechanism; 
(ii) Have unified digital portal for grievance redressal w.r.t ‘Fake 
News/misinformation; 
(iii)  Emulate best practices of international standard/ certain 
States/Union Territories that dedicated helpline number/portal to 
counter misinformation and fake news; 
(iv)  Impress upon Social Media Platforms to strengthen their 
grievance redressal mechanism through helpline number or 
other recourse for dealing with cases of Fake News; and 
(v) Increase public awareness about the existing Grievance 
Redressal Channels/mechanism to prevent misinformation/Fake 
News. 
 
Artificial Intelligence and Fake News 
9. The Committee note that advances in technology, particularly in Artificial 
Intelligence (AI), offer promising solutions to address issues related to Fake 
news. However, according to the Ministry, Artificial Intelligence is an evolving 
technology and works on use of pre -existing information available on internet 
and therefore, in its present state of development it cannot be used for a subject 
as complicated as fact checking. But AI could be used to flag potentially fake 
news/ misleading content for review by human intervention as a second layer of 
monitoring. During examination of the subject, several examples of personal 
experience of stakeholders were a revelation as to how AI could be used to create 
videos of fake news and misinformation particularly because no  information was 
available with the stakeholders with respect to AI generated videos or news. 
The Committee note that various research projects and initiatives are 
exploring the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in combating fake news. AI and 
machine learning (ML) technologies are increasingly being employed to enhance 
the ability to detect, verify, and prevent the spread of misinformation and 
disinformation. Some key developments and projects in this field include (i) AI -

82 
 
based Fact-Checking Tools; (ii) Deep Learning for Image and Video Verification: 
Fake News Detection on Social Media Using AI -based Image; (iii) AI for Detecting 
Disinformation on Social Media; (iv) AI to Identify Misinformation Networks; (v) 
AI-Powered Tools for Content Verification and Fact -Checking; (vi) Collaboration 
between AI and Fact -Checking Networks; etc.  The Committee also note that the 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) has constituted a 
nine-member Committee to examine problems related to the ‘issue of deepfakes’. 
Further, two projects to detect fake news, which are currently underway are (i) 
Fake Speech Detection using Deep Learning Framework and (ii) Design and 
Development of Software for Detecting Deepfake Videos and Images. The 
Committee were apprised that internationally there are several ongoing research 
projects on detecting AI -generated content and developing AI tools that facilitate 
the detection of fake news.  
The Committee note and acknowledge the role of AI in combating Fake 
News, particularly in detecting misleading visual content, verifying claims, and 
identifying the networks responsible for spreading misinformation. The 
Committee, appreciate the research projects and initiatives which are exploring 
the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in combating fake news, particularly by MeitY.  
The Committee are also aware how AI can be used to create ‘Fake 
News/Misinformation. Thus, with a word of caution, the Committee advocate for a 
balanced approach for using AI to curb Fake News wherein AI tools are leveraged 
with human oversight . The Committee also urge for close coordination between 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting , Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY) , and other concerned Ministries/Departments  to 
develop concrete legal and technological solutions for identifying and 
prosecuting individuals and entities responsible for disseminating AI -generated 
fake news.  The Committee recommend for inter -Ministerial coordination for 
exploring the feasibility of Licensing requirements for AI content creators and 
Mandatory labelling of AI -generated videos and content, and apprise them about 
the action taken in the matter accordingly. 
 
 

83 
 
Challenges associated with Fake News crossing international borders  
 
10. The Committee have been informed that there are certain issues associated 
with Fake News crossing international borders like (i) Jurisdictional Issues: 
different countries have varying laws and regulations regarding misinformation, 
making it difficult to enforce global content moderation; (ii) Language Barriers: 
Fake news can spread across borders in different languages, requiring tailored 
detection tools that may not be universally effective; (iii) Platform Control: Global 
platforms can enable the rapid spread of misinformation across borders, but 
regulating this content consistently worldwide is challenging; (iv) Cultural 
Differences: What is considered misinformation in one country may be 
interpreted differently in another, complicating the global fight against fake news.  
Further, the Committee have been informed that regulating speech on social 
media platforms that transcends geographical boundaries raises significant 
challenges from a regulatory perspective as it raises issues concerning 
jurisdiction. Besides, globally, there are divergent laws, norms and practices for 
regulating content, geopolitical conditions, making transnational regulation of 
fake news difficult. The Ministry ha ve informed that the Publishers of news and 
current affairs on Digital media, which host news relating to India, even if 
operating from outside the Country are subject to the ‘IT Rules, 2021’ and 
direction for blocking of access of their content falling under Section 69A of ‘IT 
Act’ in India, can be issued by the Government. The request for blocking is 
considered as per the laid down procedure in the IT Rules, 2021. The Committee 
note that in the past, the Ministry has issued directions under this Section for 
blocking access to content emanating from foreign jurisdictions in India.  
With respect to international collaboration for curbing fake news, the 
Committee have been informed that India is a member of UNESCO.  Department 
of Higher Education under the Central Government has established an Indian 
National Commission for Cooperation (INCCU) with UNESCO having 05 Sub 
Commissions. The Sub Commission on Communication comes under the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and is Chaired by Secretary (I&B). This 
Sub Commission discusses issues related to mass media, journalist freedom 
etc., in the Country. The Committee also learnt that there are several international 
initiatives to combat fake news, such as the EU's Digital Services Act and 

84 
 
UNESCO’s guidelines for tackling misinformation and India has participated in 
global discussions on misinformation but has not yet fully established binding 
international standards for combating fake news. However, India has collaborated 
with other countries and global tech companies to share information and 
strengthen fact-checking efforts. When asked whether India could emulate any of 
the international best practices related to the regulation of misinformation or 
‘Fake News’, one of the stakeholders submitted that India should have its own 
law, and the French law on Election Misinformation was a good law which could 
be looked up to for some aspects. The Committee, while acknowledging the 
complexities involved in fake news crossing borders feel that apart from Inter -
Ministerial collaboration at national level and multi -lateral cooperation with 
international bodies following may also be considered to address the concerns 
related to Cross-Border Fake News and they may be apprised accordingly: 
(i) The Ministry may emulate best practices adopted by other countries, 
for example like French Law on Election Misinformation, etc  with a 
perspective of dealing with Fake News in India; 
(ii) To have a small but a dedicated Inter -Ministerial Task Force to deal 
with issues related to cross -border misinformation/Fake News with 
representatives from the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting (MIB), 
Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY) and  eminent legal experts in the field; 
and 
(iii)  To conduct nation-wide campaigns to educate citizens about the 
risks of cross-border fake news, especially in regional languages. 
 
Awareness/Training/Media literacy 
11. The Committee note that Fact Check Unit under PIB, which does fact 
checking only in respect of information pertaining to the Government,  uses 
engaging content in the form of memes/Crisp Videos/Awareness Posts and has 
also conducted campaigns such as #FACTREE, #CyberMonday, etc., to increase 
public awareness about the baneful effects of fake news and sensitize them 
against sharing of unverified information. The Committee also note that Media 
organisations have their own awareness and training program mes for journalists 
and public at large. It is also learnt that to enhance awareness, the PCI carries out 
sustained Social Media campaigns by making regular updates of Norms on its 
official Social Media Handle - X. Further, the Council while considering the matter 

85 
 
regarding strategies and efforts to tackle fake news during its meeting held on 
22.09.2022, had also recommended for inclusion of media studies in academic 
curriculum. Accordingly, communication was sent by PCI to the Ministry of 
Education vide letter dated 09.12.2022 for taking necessary action in the matter.  
Further, while noting that one of the causes of ‘Fake News’ proliferation 
was ‘Lack of Media Literacy’, the Ministry was asked about their initiatives for 
creating specific programme for generating and creating awareness. To this, MIB 
informed that Media literacy can best be achieved through creating public 
awareness of the harmful effects of fake news and sensitizing citizens and other 
stakeholders against sharing of unverified information. This can be done through 
appropriate outreach activities for citizen engagement particularly for younger 
generation in association with educational institutions. While considering the 
aspect of creating awareness about Fake News, during examination of the 
subject, all the stakeholders unanimously agreed for having curriculum for Media 
literacy at school/college levels. 
The Committee while appreciating the initiatives taken to promote media 
literacy/generating awareness regarding Fake news/ misinformation opine that all 
the stakeholders may mandatorily conduct workshops for generating awareness 
and take initiatives for wider engagements about fake news. The Committee also 
recommend for having broader consultations with all the concerned stakeholders 
including Ministry of Education.  While noting that there are many ways to impart 
media literacy, the Committee urge that media literacy beginning at 
School/College level can have far reaching effect and play a crucial role on young 
minds. The Committee, therefore, call upon the Ministry to consider, during their 
consultation with stakeholders, a comprehensive media literacy curriculum which 
can be designed for the educational journey of a student s. Training the teachers, 
instructors, librarian, etc., at the school level can also be considered.  Besides, 
public awareness campaign, guidelines and frameworks for media literacy are 
essential for encouraging critical thinking. The Committee may be apprised of the 
concrete outcome of the deliberations in this regard. The Ministry may also 
apprise the Committee about the  concrete action taken by the Ministry of 
Education with respect to the suggestions of PCI for having media studies 
included in the curriculum for the children. 
 
 

86 
 
Social media, Algorithm and Fake News/Misinformation 
 
12. During examination of the subject, most of the stakeholders raised concern 
with respect to ‘Safe Harbour’ clause under Section 79 of the IT Act, 2000 that 
provides for exemption from liability of intermediary, subject to certain 
safeguards, for any third -party information, data, or communication link made 
available or hosted by him. It was also learnt that for most of the digital news 
publishers on major social media intermediary platforms, the revenue model is 
such that the sensational and potentially fake content gets more traction and the 
algorithms of such platform further amplifies such content. The Ministry also 
informed that algorithms used by social media platforms significantly influence 
how the information spreads online. Since sensational and emotionally charged 
content tends to attract higher engagement, social media platforms often 
prioritize such content, which sometimes are fake or misleading. During 
examination of the subject, m ost of the stakeholders expressed their concern 
related to amplification of fake news through algorithmic biases because t his 
vicious cycle often leads to virality of fake news. 
  In this regard, the Ministry also informed that the Hon’ble Minister of 
Information and Broadcasting (HMIB) on one occasion had called for 
accountability in digital media to combat fake news and safeguard democracy 
and had suggested that in changing media landscape and India's diverse social 
and cultural context, there is a need for revisiting the 'Safe Harbour' provision for 
the social media intermediaries. The Committee were also given to understand 
that the Minister had pointed out that algorithms driving digital platforms 
prioritises content that maximises engagement, inciting strong reactions and, 
thereby, defining the revenue for the platform. Since such biases have social 
consequences, particularly in a diverse nation like India, there is a need for 
platforms to come up with solutions to eliminate such biases.   
While noting the concerns relating to the intermediary platforms and Big 
Tech companies, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) 
was asked to provide their views/suggestions with respect to issues related to 
the subject and regarding user generated content. However, MeitY did not 
provide any suggestion, instead it merely  stated that under the given Rule/Act, 
the subject falls under MIB. Considering the technological advancements, the 
Committee note the complex and inter -sectoral issues involved in dissemination 

87 
 
of misinformation/Fake News and thereby calls for coordination between not only 
different stakeholders of Media, but also among different Ministries/Departments. 
The Committee, therefore, urge  MIB to ensure a n inter-Ministerial coordination 
mechanism among all those concerned. Further, f or making social 
media/intermediary platforms more accountable w.r.t peddling Fake 
content/News, the Committee endorse the view that for enforcing transparency in 
algorithms, introduce stricter fines, and penalties for repeat offenders, establish 
independent regulatory body, use technological tools like AI to curb the spread of 
misinformation, etc.  The Ministry may apprise  of the Committee about the future 
course of action/action taken by them to address the concerns/suggestions made 
by the Hon’ble Minister of Information and Broadcasting regarding ‘Safe Harbour’ 
clause and other related issues. Besides, t he Committee urge the Ministry to 
explore ways and means to address the concerns associated with algorithm 
biases and its role in amplifying Fake News and apprise them in this regard.  The 
Committee also recommend the Ministry to look into the feasibility of following 
and apprise them accordingly: 
(i) To work with MeitY and other stakeholders and bring out a solution 
to address the issues related to Big Tech Companies and individual 
content creators or influencers; 
(ii) The Ministry may come out with concrete solutions with respect to 
intermediaries/publishers particularly to deal with ‘Safe Harbour’; 
(iii) To have a  dedicated Nodal officer (in India) in the Big tech 
companies; etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
    11 September, 2025  Chairperson, 
     20 Bhadra, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

88 
 
 Appendix- I 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND 
 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 21st November, 202 4 from 1 100 hours to 
1328 hours in Committee Room  No. '1' , Extension to Parliament House Annexe , New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
 
     Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
4. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
5. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
6. Shri Devesh Shakya 
7. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
8. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
9. Shri Saket Gokhale  
10. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
11. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
12. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi   - Director 
2.          Shri Rajesh Mohan   -     Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 

89 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1.  Shri C. Senthil Rajan JS (IP&A) 
2.  Shri B. Narayanan Dir. General, New Media Wing 
3.  Ms. Mattu J. P. Singh Dir. General, PIB 
News Broadcasting and Digital Association (NBDA)  
1.  Shri Rajat Sharma President, NBDA 
2.  Smt. Anuradha Prasad Shukla Board Member 
3.  Smt. Annie Joseph Secretary General 
Editors Guild of India (EGI)  
1.  Shri Anant Nath President 
2.  Shri Ruben Banerjee General Secretary 
3.  Shri K. V. Prasad Treasurer 
 
(After the witnesses were called in) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting, News Broadcasting and Digital Association (NBDA) , 
Editors Guild of India  and other officials accompanying them to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to examine  the subject ‘ Review mechanism to curb Fake News ’ 
relating to the Ministry of  Information and Broadcasting.  
 
3. Drawing attention to the menace of fake news, t he Chairperson  highlighted its 
impact on different spheres of individual’s life. Elaborating further on the issue, he 
expounded the impact of fabricated stories, doctored images, misleading headlines, 
false narratives, etc, on election, identity theft, communal violence,  false claims about 
cures, vaccines or spread of virus led to confusion with people rejecting legitimate 
health advice in favour of unverified rumours during COVID pandemic, etc . While 
acknowledging the efforts of Government for setting up the Fact Check Unit (FCU) and 
for curbing the spread of misinformation, he stated that despite all the efforts of the 
Government, NGOs, Educational institutions and media outlets, tackling/curbing Fake 
News in India still remained as a challenge. He also emphasized that with rapid 
advancement in AI technologies , deepfakes content c ould be created and distributed 
across borders with eas e and  it was difficult for any single country’s legal system to 
address the issue comprehensively. T o counter this he felt the need for a multi-faceted 
approach, including stronger national and international regulations,  international 
cooperation and harmonisation of legal frameworks , improved media literacy, greater 
accountability from social media platforms, active public participation to verify and 
responsibly shar ing information, etc. While seeking views on the subject from MIB, 
NBDA and EGI, he asked NBDA and EGI to also submit their proposals on the 
amendments in ‘The Broadcasters Regulation Bill, 2023’. 
 

90 
 
4. Thereafter, the President, NBDA, expressed his views on the subject. Dwelling 
on the issue of fake news, he broadly categorized   the menace of fake news under 
following categories 
 (i) Media Channels (ii) Digital media platforms and (iii) AI converted videos and their 
impact on common man.  
 
5. He stated that while media channels are self/independently regulated and most  
of them come under some regulatory bodies like NBDA who are empowered to take 
action either suo moto or based on some complaint  against such channels who are 
found guilty of spreading fake news/misinformation yet, there is a flip side to this 
mechanism  that the member channels are free to leave this body any time if they feel 
aggrieved by the decision of NBDA. To deal with this issue, he opined that all channels 
should be brought under some sort of regulation/regulatory mechanism  to fix their 
accountability . While elaborating on the role of digital media and AI converted videos in 
spreading fake news/misinformation  he stated that they have a big role in spreading 
fake news/misinformation and common man find no remedy against them either in 
cyber cell or in these platforms who are often faceless and the Government has no 
direct control over them. He admitted that by the time an aggrieved party gets justice 
from court, a lot of damage is already caused to his reputation. He , therefore, felt the 
need for a suitable legislation by the Government to protect common man from such 
acts who has no resources to fight against them.  
 
6. While concluding his presentation, he put forward some suggestions like (i) to 
have a dedicated Nodal Officer/face for Internet Platforms; (ii) to take immediate action 
for deleting fake News/videos within 6 hrs pending further investigation; (iii) to grant  
license with stringent Rules to AI generator; and (iv) to look for a solution from a global 
perspective rather than  at National level.  
 
7. Thereafter, the President, EGI, while presenting his views on the subject, stated 
that in India there was no absolute freedom of speech  as Article 19(2) has eight/nine 
exceptions. He also submitted that our legal system permit ted  maximum  checks and 
balances in both civil and criminal domain . Citing certain  provisions like Section 353  of 
‘Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita  (BNS)’ and Section 69 of ‘Information Technology Act, 2000’ 
he pointed out  that the blocking power  was opaque and suggested Government should 
not be coercive. To deal with the issue, he  made some suggestions which , inter-alia, 
included: (i) Government should identify Fake content/News ; (ii) Government should  
work with Industry; (iii) Response time should be quick ; (iv) Media platforms should put 
in more resources/energy/money in flagging  fake content; (v) Transparency should be 
maintained in flagging and taking down fake content; (vi) Need of Media Literacy  to 
enable public to identify Fake News ; (vii) Media bodies should create Self Regulatory 
system for Grievance Redressal Mechanism and for flagging but without involvement of 
Government; (viii) To have international alliances/collaborations, etc. 

91 
 
 
8. The Members then sought clarifications on various issues which , inter-alia, 
included; (i) Mechanism for fixing responsibility of the Channels/Media which are not 
part of any of the Self Regulatory bodies; (ii) Online portal for registering complaints with 
respect to Fake News; (iii) Time taken to settle the issue of Fake News after it is 
flagged; (iv) Cases /Complaints (relating to Fake News) dealt by the Ministry/Inter -
Departmental Committee ; (iv) Channels that were taken Off -Air for telecasting Fake 
News; (v)  Mechanism, cases  and other issues related to Fact Check Units of PIB/MIB; 
(vi) Guidelines set for editorial s for running/telecasting/printing News ; (vii) Adequacy of 
penal provisions for Fake News and need for variation in penalty for repeated offenders; 
(viii) Grievance Redressal Mechanism for common man; (ix) Measures for creating 
awareness amongst common man for identifying and taking action against Fake 
News/content; (x) Mechanism to fact check the News run by Government Agencies;       
(xi) Instances when self regulations by Journalist s/TV Broadcasters fail and Courts ha d 
to intervene; (xii) Relevance of Press Council of India (PCI) and ‘The PCI Act, 1978’; 
(xiii) ‘Safe Harbour’ provisions used by intermediaries and need for making 
intermediaries more accountable;  (xiv) Role of Artificial Intelligence in Fake News  and 
their impact; (xv) Need for having global collaboration for tackling the menace of Fake 
News; (xvi) Need for enacting Bills/Acts to regulate online service 
providers/independent Youtube creators more or less similar to that one   brought by 
various other countries like UK, Singapore, etc.  
  
9. The representatives of  the  Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  (MIB), 
NBDA and EGI  responded to most of the queries raised by the Members. The 
Chairperson, then, directed that written replies to points on which information were not 
readily available may be furnished to the Committee within ten days. 
 
10. Thereafter, the Chairperson  thanked the representatives of MIB, NBDA and EGI  
for deposing before the Committee.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 

92 
 
 Appendix-II 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND 
 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 7 th May, 202 5 from 1 100 hours to 1 223 
hours in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
 
     Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
3. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
4. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
5. Shri Shafi Parambil 
6. Shri M. K. Vishnu Prasad 
7. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
8. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
9. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
10. Shri Devesh Shakya 
11. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Saket Gokhale  
13. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
14. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
15. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal   - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi   - Director 
3. Shri Amrish Kumar   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Rajesh Mohan   -     Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

93 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1.  Shri Sanjay Jaju Secretary, MIB 
2.  Shri C. Senthil Rajan JS (IP&A) 
3.  Shri Santosh Kumar ADG, PIB 
4.  Shri G. Venkata Subbaiah Director, MIB 
5.  Shri Amarendra Singh Director, MIB 
 
HINDUSTAN TIMES   
1.  Shri Sukumar Ranganathan Editor-in-Chief 
2.  Shri Saubhadra Chatterjee Senior Editor  
INDIAN EXPRESS  
1.  Shri Raj Kamal Jha Chief Editor  
NDTV 
 
2.  Shri Sanjay Pugalia Executive Director 
3.  Shri Nikhil Guliani Chief Legal & Regulatory Officer 
 
NEWS-18 NETWORK 
 
1.  Shri Brajesh Kumar Singh Group Editor-Integration &Convergence 
2.  Shri Gautam Dubey Head Legal Counsel 
3.  Shri Ankit Singh Lead- Regulatory 
 
TV TODAY NETWORK LTD 
 
1.  Shri Supriya Prasad News Director 
2.  Ms. Poulomi Mrinal Saha Senior Editor- Group Synergy and Special 
Projects 
3.  Shri Balkrishna Executive Editor- Fact Check 
 
 
11. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to have evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting (MIB) and other Stakeholders related to Media Industry in 
connection with the examination of the subject ‘ Review of mechanism to curb Fake 
News’. Thereafter, he informed the Members about the request made by the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting  to conclude the Sitting early, due to their pre -occupation 
with aftermath of ‘Operation Sindoor’ , a military operation against Pakistan post 
Phalgam attack and the request was acceded to by the Committee.  
 
(After the witnesses were called in) 
 
12. Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting (MIB), Hindustan Times , The Indian Express , NDTV, 
News-18 Network and TV Today Network Ltd., and other officials accompanying them 
to the Sitting of the Committee . Drawing attention to the request of MIB to conclude the 
Sitting early, the Chairperson informed the Ministry and Stakeholders that since all the 
stakeholders were present for the Sitting, they might present their view s in brief before 
the Comm ittee. Further, recalling the terror attack on 22 nd April, 2025 in Pahalgam 

94 
 
(Jammu & Kashmir) and the befitting reply of India under ‘Operation Sindoor’, the 
Committee placed on record their appreciation for the brave action by Indian armed 
forces to  protect the dignity of our Nation. The Chairperson,  then, recalled that the 
Committee had already heard the views of News Broadcasting and Digital Association 
(NBDA) and Editors Guild of India (EGI) on this subject on 21 st November, 2024. 
Drawing attention to the unimaginable damage created by Fake News  he described 
how at times in order to increase the TRP ratings  a few Electronic Media indulge in 
airing exaggerated content and unverified news. He highlighted how Fake n ews lead to 
deception and fraud, enabled  scams, impersonat ion, falsified evidence, damaged  
personal and prof essional credibility and result  in national security threats as well as 
reduction in  trust in legitimate evidence complicating truth verification. He also 
highlighted Clickbait stories that are deliberately fabricated to gain more website visitors 
and increase advertising revenue for websites . Voicing public concern, he  expressed 
that people expected MIB to maintain balance between the Fundamental Right (Right to 
free speech and expression and the Freedom of Press) and the need to counter false 
and harmful content across various media forms. Subsequently, he dealt with the role 
and function of Fact Check Unit (FCU) under PIB; Norms of Journalistic Conduct under 
‘Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995’; Amended version of Cable 
Television Network Rule’; ‘IT Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code 
Rules 21’; Social media platforms as the dominant source of misinformation; etc. 
Recalling the commitment of the Minister, MeitY with respect to  addressing fake news 
and deep fake , the Chairperson  emphasized on the need to adopt a multifaceted 
approach, public awareness, media literacy and technological intervention and stated 
that encouraging critical thinking and fact -checking habits among citizens is vital to 
reduce the blind sharing of misinformation. Thereafter, he asked the Stakeholder s to 
apprise about the problems being faced by them in handling, detecting, preventing Fake 
News along with the suggestions to strengthen the existing law s/ rules to curb the 
proliferation of Fake News on Print, Electronic, Digital, Social Media. The Stakeholders 
were also asked to enlighten the Committee about the challenges posed by Artificial 
Intelligence in spreading false narratives and the ways and means to curb them. 
 
13. After that, the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB), briefed 
the Committee about the advent of social media and online platforms, battling Fake 
News and misinformation that had acquired an absolutely new dimension which were 
being used by both anti -social as well as anti -India actors for spreading rumours, fake 
news, false narratives, misinformation, disinformation. Highlighting the responsibility of 
MIB - the task of dissemina ting right information about Government policies  and 
administering the Acts that are passed by the Parliament  - he expounded about the 
action taken to curb Fake News under the existing Acts and Guidelines for the Print, 
Electronic and Digital Media viz. ‘The Press Council Act of 1978 ’, ‘ The Press and 
Registration of Periodicals Act 2023 ’, ‘The Cable Television Networks Regulation Act 
1995’, ‘ The Information Technology Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 

95 
 
Code Rules 2021’, etc. and also informed about the work done by the Fact-Check Unit 
[established in the Press Information Bureau  (PIB)] on misinformation that is being 
peddled by the inimical forces. 
 
14. Subsequently, the Editor-in-Chief, Hindustan Times, pointed out that ‘Fake News’ 
has been there in Print Media . However, with the onset of Electronic Media it got 
magnified and with the emergence of Social Media it bec ame a huge problem. He also 
stated that because of technologies, audio transcripts  or video files are made to look 
like real and therefore two very essential aspects of journalism become important. The 
first one is contextualization and second one is to have reporters on the ground for 
calling up people and verifying things before putting it out. In Social media and to a 
large extent, even in online media, there are desk jockeys who are sitting and typing 
based on what they are seeing on social media, without either contextualizing it or 
without calling up people and verifying it.  He, then, gave a brief of the rules followed by 
Hindustan Times before telecasting News, as well as about their data unit which looks 
into primary data. He pointed out that there was a need to address the problem 
associated with regulating/controlling Big Tech companies which the entire world is 
currently facing. 
 
15. Thereafter, the Senior Editor ( Group Synergy and Special Projects ), from India 
Today Group, pointed out the challenges of social media proliferation, deep fakes, AI -
generated videos and misinformation that does the rounds because of economic 
incentives attached and algorithms which probably amplify information . She informed 
about Media Literacy and issues related to Big Techs  and about the checks and 
balances follow ed by their television channels like Aaj Tak, India Today, Good News 
Today, or digital portals like Lallantop, etc. While submitting about the various tools 
used by them for doing background check, she stated that they had their own Fact 
Check Unit. Adding further, the head of their Fact -Check Unit informed the Committee 
that ‘Today Group’ was the first big media organization in the Country which established 
a separate fact -check desk department in 2018  and it operated  in four languages.  He 
also informed that they run a WhatsApp channel  which is the biggest not only in India 
but also in the world. He also added that they also run a separate desk where anybody 
could send matter to verify, and then they would revert. 
 
16. Subsequently, the Group Editor (Integration & Convergence), News-18 Network, 
acknowledged ‘Fake News’ as a serious and growing threat, especially in the age of AI 
and deepfakes and stated that Media's contribution to ‘Fake News’ is less than 25%. 
He, then, explained about their multi -layered mechanism involved in checking and 
cross-checking the news at several levels and about the regular Workshops organized 
for this. He also stated that there were  other existing mechanism s which included 
institutions like the Press Council of India for the Press; NBDA for Digital and Broadcast, 
‘Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita  (BNS), IT Acts, etc. While emphasizing that Network -18 is 
committed to responsible journalism and safeguarding national interests, he stated that 

96 
 
a fine balance is required between the freedom of the press and th e responsibility of 
Media which could be achieved through existing laws and self-regulatory bodies. 
 
17. Thereafter, Executive Director, NDTV, beg an with the explanation for the fake 
video of couple dancing circulated on social me dia after the Pahalgam tragedy,  and 
stated that everyone had become victims of insecure news and rumors circulating on 
social media. He emphasized that their channel never picks up the story from social 
media without checking it 2 -3 times and therefore they make minimal mista kes.  In the 
wave of social media, news rooms have become insecure and in the race to be first, 
despite being skeptical, news are picked up thinking that everyone will bear the 
brunt/get admonished. He also stated that some  things, however, can only be 
addressed through education and awareness. Regarding Big Tech, he stated that to 
ensure their accountability, Government has to act strongly by treating aggregators as 
publishers else there would be no deterrence . While citing the example of SEBI , which 
brought the financial influencers under regulation by requiring registration, he suggested 
that a similar model could be applied to content creators and influencers. He also stated 
that India already had sufficient laws and self -regulatory mechanism which if 
implemented effectively could achieve accountability. As for individual  creators and 
regulating social media platforms, he submitted that it was a very challenging task . 
However, considering where India st ood today, if the law that is  applied to Indian 
organizations is also applied to these platforms, then this problem could be resolved 
very quickly. 
 
18. Thereafter, the Chief Editor, Indian Express, presented four points on the subject. 
Firstly, he stated that ‘Fake news’ is a strong term and that there is a need to have a 
clear definition of it because not all mistakes in journalism qualify as Fake News as 
there i s a difference between deliberate misinformation and genuine editorial errors. 
Secondly, mainstream media does not make ‘Fake News’ and they are not black box as 
the Media Houses /Editors are reachable. Citing an example , he stated  that one 
story/news reaching million viewers and other only few hundred,  therefore there is a 
need to engage with big technology companies as they have a vital role in 
disseminating information/Fake News /in amplification of misinformation. Thirdly,  he 
stated that while ‘Fake News’ is a challenge, India’s digital landscape has few positives 
like it has one  billion smartphones, record v oter turnout, booming UPI usage  and 
previously unheard voices now being heard.  So, there was a need to  strike a balance  
when regulation is thought about. Fourthly, he requested the elected representatives to 
reach out to the youngsters in schools and colleges for increasing ‘Media literacy’ 
because ‘Fake News’ is a deluge  as lot of them is not made by human beings instead  
they are made  by chatbots, codes , etc., in some other  Country. He stated that any 
regulation should keep in mind  that all the youngsters are going to grow u p with the 
phones in their hand and to make them safe, school boards may introduce a course in 

97 
 
4th, 5 th or 6 th grade on how to filter information. He concluded with the example of 
sending their Editors to schools to talk to students. 
 
19. The Members , then, discussed various related issues which inter-alia included            
(i) Accountability of Media and the need for a dedicated discussion on the  role of  Media 
in character assassination of women; (ii) Mechanism and details of the action taken 
against reporters targeting individuals in local news, sometimes due to personal 
reasons, caste or local pressure: (iii) Seeking views/concrete suggestions from Media 
Houses for shaping legislation; (iv) Lack of definition of ‘Fake News’ in the legal 
framework; (v)  Need for hearing Platforms as they take 90 –95% of advertisement 
revenues and yet have no accountability; (vi) Need for hearing all the related 
stakeholders; (vii) Need for rule/regulation for Reporters and Journalists who use their 
personal social media handles for disseminating news as that does not come under the 
ambit of NBDA because that is their personal handle; (viii) Need for 
guidelines/rule/regulation for publishing the News citing anonymous source; (ix)  Need 
for having increased punitive measures against anyone who is involved, whether it is 
Publishers or a Broadcaster; (x) Need for having strong law to deal with ‘Fake News’ 
run without facts and ju st based on source; (xi) Need for deciding the fixation of 
responsibility - whether it should be the Media House or the Editors or the Reporters on 
the ground ;  (xii) Need for discussing various issues while defining  ‘Fake News’ like 
how much of the News is fake and how much is not or who would define it – Legislators/ 
the Parliament/ News Channels or who would interpret/decide it as ‘Fake News’ or the 
percentage of information required to be fake for News to be considered as Fake; (xiii) 
Need for large scale awareness programme for curbing Fake News; (xiv) Need for 
balancing Freedom of Expression and responsibility of Media; (xv) Need to rethink 
about having TRP system for Channels; (xvi) Ministry/Government to avoid News or 
information quoting sources; etc. In response to Members suggestion to  call other  
related Stakeholders for discussion, the Chairperson clarified that the Committee have 
already heard NBDA and EGI on 21.11.2024. 
 
20. The Chairperson, then, directed the representatives of the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting  (MIB) and Stakeholders from Media Industry that written replies to 
points on which information were not readily available may be furnished to the 
Committee within ten days. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the representatives of 
MIB, Hindustan Times, The Indian Express, NDTV, News -18 Network and TV Today 
Network Ltd for deposing before the Committee.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
***** 

98 
 
Appendix III 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY- SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 9 th September, 2025 from 1500 hours to 1635 
hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey- Chairperson 
 
 Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri C. N. Annadurai 
3. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
4. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
6. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
7. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
8. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam  
9. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
10. Shri Shafi Parambil 
11. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
12. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
13. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
14. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15. Shri Devesh Shakya 
16. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
17. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
18. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
19. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
20. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
21. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal              -  Additional Secretary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi                        -          Director 
3. Shri Amrish Kumar    -      Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Rajesh Mohan                        -      Deputy Secretary 

99 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt two Draft Subject Reports relating to         
(i) Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology and (ii) Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting ,respectively, under the jurisdiction of the Committee and to have 
evidence of the representatives of Department of Telecommunications, DBN, BSNL, 
PGCIL, RAILTEL, Bharti Airtel, RJIL and CSC E- Governance Services India Ltd. on the 
Subject ‘Review of the performance of Schemes/ Projects under Digital Bharat 
Nidhi (DBN) implemented by Public and Private Sectors’.  
 
3. The Committee, then, took up the following two draft Reports for consideration and 
adopted the same with slight modifications:- 
 
(i) XXXX………..XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX… 
(ii) Draft Report on the Subject ‘Review of Mechanism to curb Fake News’  
relating to Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
4. The Committee also authorized Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and 
present  them to the Hon’ble Speaker under Direction 71 A and seek orders for printing, 
publication and circulation of the Reports under Rule 280 of Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
 
5. XXXX………..XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX… 
6. XXXX………..XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX… 
7. XXXX………..XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX… 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
****** 
______________________________________________________________________ 
XXXX- Matter not related to this Report. 
 