 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAREDUCATION, WOMEN, CH
      
THREE Action Taken Note on 31Standing Committee on HRD on (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on……......., 2020)(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020)
THREE HUNDRED Action Taken Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Fifty FourthSashaktikaran Karyakram (RYSK)(Presented to the(Laid on the Table of 
 
 PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEEEDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SP     Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi    February, 2025 /Magha,1946 (Saka)     
THREE HUNDRED AND         REPORT ON Action Taken Note on 311th Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on HRD on the Subject Khelo India SchemePresented to the Rajya Sabha on……......., 2020) (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020)
HUNDRED AND SIXTIETH REPORTON Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Fifty Fourth Report on “Review of Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakram (RYSK)”  Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th February, 2025Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th February, 2025
   Y STANDING COMMITTEE ON ILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS Report No 360 
Report of the Department related Parliamentary the Subject Khelo India Scheme  (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020) 
REPORT by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Review of Rashtriya Yuva   5) February, 2025) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in  

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARON EDUCATION, WOMEN,THREE HUNDRED Action Taken Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Fifty Fourth Report on(Presented to the(Laid on the Table  
 
         
Hindi version of this publication is also available  PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA   RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEEON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND  HUNDRED AND SIXTIETH REPORTON Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Fifty Fourth Report on “Review of Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakaram (RYSK)”  Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th February, 2025d on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th February, 2025       
 
       Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi      February, 2025 /Magha,1946 (Saka)      
Hindi version of this publication is also available Y STANDING COMMITTEE CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS REPORT by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Review of Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran February, 2025) February, 2025) 
  

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ….................................................... (i) 
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................  (ii) 
3.  ACRONYMS.....................................................................................................        (iii) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…................ 1-17  
Chapter-I  -   Recommendations which have been accepted  
 by the Government ............................................................... .....   2 
Chapter -II  -  Recommendations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies...........  3-5 
Chapter-III -  Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee....  6-13 
 Chapter-IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government are still awaited…..  14-19    
   
5. RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE.. ............... 20-23 
6. MINUTES        …………….  24-28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
 
1.  Shri Digvijaya Singh    - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
3. Ms. Sushmita Dev 
4. Dr. Sikander Kumar 
5. Shrimati Sunetra Ajit Pawar 
6. Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
7. Dr. Bhim Singh 
8. Shri Harbhajan Singh  
9. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
10. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
12. Dr. Angomcha Bimol Akoijam 
13. Shrimati Rachna Banerjee 
14. Shrimati Shobhanaben Mahendrasinh Baraiya 
15. Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary 
16. Shri Jitendra Kumar Dohare 
17. Prof. Varsha Eknath Gaikwad 
18. Shri Abhijit Gangopadhyay 
19. Dr. Hemang Joshi 
20. Shri Amar Sharadrao Kale 
21. Shri Kalipada Saren Kherwal 
22.  Adv Dean Kuriakose 
23.  Dr. Sambit Patra 
24.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
25.  Dr. D Purandeswari 
26.  Shri Rajeev Rai 
27. Shri Zia Ur Rehman 
28. Shri Karan Bhushan Singh 
29.  Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
30. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
31. Dr. T Sumathy alias Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shri Jayanta Kumar Mallick, Director  
Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
Shri Ashwani Yadav, Senior Secretariat Assistant  
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 

 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Sixtieth Report of the Committee 
on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Three Hundred and Fifty Fourth Report on “Review of Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran 
Karyakaram (RYSK)” which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok 
Sabha on 8th August, 2023. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations/Observations contained in above 
mentioned Report were received from the Ministry of Sports and Youth Affairs vide their 
communications dated 5th February, 2024.  
3.  The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 
20th December, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
20 December, 2024                                                                                                   
Agrahayana 29, 1946 (Saka)  
 
  
 
 
 
 
Shri Digvijaya Singh  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AYUSH  Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha 
and Homeopathy 
BE  Budget Estimates 
CBO    Community Based Organisation  
CII    Confederation of Indian Industry 
COVID    Corona Virus Disease 
CPWD   Central Public Works Department 
CSC    Common Service Centres  
DYO   District Youth Officer  
DYRC   District Youth Resource Centre    
HS&G    Hindustan Scouts & Guides  
IEC   International Electrotechnical Commission 
IFD   Integrated Finance Division 
IYEP    International Youth Exchange Programme  
MEITY   Ministry of Electronics and Information 
    Technology 
MoW&CD   Ministry of Women and Child Development 
NDRF   National Disaster Response Force 
NPYAD   National Programme for Youth and Adolescent    
Development  
NYC    National Youth Corps  
NYKS    Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan  
NYP    Neighbourhood Youth Parliament  
NYSK    Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan  
NYV   National Youth Volunteer 
PMGDISHA   PM Gramin Digital Saksharta Mission 
POSHAN    Prime Minister's Overarching Scheme for Holistic 
Nutrition 
RE   Revised Estimates 
RYSK    Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakram  
SAI    Sports Authority of India  
SCO    Shanghai Cooperation Organisation  
YA  Youth Affairs 
YH   Youth Hostel 
YLP  Young Leaders Programmes 
 
 
(iii) 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
The 360th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in its 354th Report on “Review of Rashtriya Yuva 
Sashaktikaran Karyakram (RYSK)”, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on 08th August, 2023. 
 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations/Observations contained in above 
mentioned Report were received from the Department of Youth Affairs (Ministry of Youth Affairs and 
Sports) vide their communication dated 5th February, 2024. These have been categorized below as:-  
 
Chapter I: Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
Paras –  NIL 
Total - NIL 
 
Chapter II: Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of Government's 
replies:- 
Paras –2.2.5, 3.7, 4.10, 8.6, 10.3, 10.4 
Total - 6 
 
Chapter III: Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee:- 
Paras-   2.1.7, 2.3.5, 2.3.6, 2.3.7, 3.6, 5.5, 6.6, 6.7, 7.5, 8.5, 9.4 
Total-  11 
 
Chapter-IV:  Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government are still awaited:- 
Paras – 2.1.8 
Total - 1 
 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
NIL 
 
***************** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

3 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
 
 
ROLE OF NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN IN COMBATING DRUG/SUBSTANCE 
ABUSE 
 
Recommendation  
1. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the NYKS for taking out 1,65,232 youth out of the 
clutches of drug addiction and substance abuse and bringing them back to normal life style through Fit 
India Movement and have been able to bring out so many youth through this programme in the financial 
year 2021-22 by conducting this programme. The Committee, therefore, recommends that volunteers of 
NYKS through their Centres should be groomed to provide de-addiction counseling to drug addicted 
youths especially in bordering districts of India and other districts of the country which are affected by 
drug menace in collaboration with Ministry of Home Affairs and respective State Governments on regular 
basis especially in view of the menace acquiring a mammoth proportion.         (para 2.2.5) 
 
Action Taken 
The Department in its reply has submitted that it has taken note of the recommendations of the 
committee for compliance. In this regard, NYKS has proposed a programme namely “Preventive 
Education and Awareness Program on Drug and Substance Abuse” in its proposed Annual Action Plan 
for the year 2023-24. The aim is to educate and raise awareness about the dangers of drug and substance 
abuse. Through workshops and outreach campaigns, the program will provide vital information on the 
harmful effects of drugs and substance abuse and the importance of prevention of such menace among 
adolescents and youth. Healthcare Experts and practicing professional counselors in the fields of drug de-
addiction will be roped in as Resource Persons for sharing their experiences during the Programme. This 
will raise awareness among youth and adolescents and also provide vital clue and feedback for 
developing comprehensive strategies for requisite intervention and support. 
 
NATIONAL YOUTH CORPS (NYC) 
 
Recommendation  
2. The Committee recommends that in order to motivate the volunteers of NYKS, they should be 
recognized as Jan Mitra to acknowledge their novel volunteering works towards Nation Building. 
(para 3.7)   
Action Taken 
The Ministry submits that with regards to the recommendation of the committee to change the 
name of NYVs as Jan Mitra, that volunteers under NYC scheme were earlier known as National Youth 
Corps. Subsequently, the nomenclature of National Youth Corps was revised as National Youth 
Volunteers w.e.f. 15th July, 2016. NYVs are functioning as an extended arm of NYK at district level in 
between NYK and Youth Clubs at Village level and their novel volunteering work towards nation 
building is getting recognition   by their name National Youth Volunteer (NYV) under NYC- a Central 
Sector Scheme. In view of the fact that nomenclature of NYC (National Youth Corps) volunteers has 
already been revised in 2016, the Committee are requested to reconsider their 
observation/recommendation. 
 

4 
 
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR YOUTH AND ADOLESCENT DEVELOPMENT (NPYAD)  
Recommendation  
3. The Committee takes note of activities undertaken under the National Programme for Youth and 
Adolescent Development (NPYAD) sub-scheme, particularly National Youth Festival and Youth Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas. The Committee also takes note of activities undertaken for promotion of national 
integration and adventure for Youth Leadership and Personality Development Training. The Committee 
is of the view that the Department should explore the possibility of increasing the provision for 
internships and fellowships to the beneficiaries under five major components of NPYAD especially 
focusing on youth from aspirational districts of the country and under privileged communities. 
(para 4.10) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has stated that under National Programme for Youth and Adolescent Development 
Scheme, National Youth Festival organized every year has the widest reach among youth. It was also 
informed that during the festival, stalls are also set-up for dissemination of information. Further, 
Department of Youth Affairs while revisiting the NPYAD scheme will explore the possibilities as 
suggested by Committee. 
 
 
NATIONAL YOUNG LEADERS PROGRAMME  
 
Recommendation  
 
4. The Committee appreciates the fund utilization under the scheme and hopes that gainful utilization 
of allocated funds will continue in future also.                  (para 8.6) 
 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed that the observation/recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
Youth Hostel: The funds are released under Youth Hostel (YH) Scheme for following activities: 
i)    Payment of Honorarium to Managers and Wardens @ Rs.12000 and Rs.6000 per month respectively 
which is released periodically. 
ii)    Repair/ Renovation of existing Youth Hostels – which is released upon receipt of viable proposals, 
availability of funds and approval of competent authority.  
iii)     Construction of Youth Hostels – Funds under BE 2023-24 have been earmarked for completion of 
construction of YH Kota. Some clarification in this regard has been sought from CPWD Jaipur. Funds 
will be released upon receipt of inputs from CPWD. 
 
 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF RYSK SCHEME  
 
Recommendation  
 
5. The Committee appreciates fund utilization under different sub-schemes of Rashtriya Yuva 
Sashaktikaran Karyakram (RYSK). Considering the fund utilization under the scheme, the Committee 
recommends that more funds should be allocated to Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakram (RYSK) 
particularly to Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan, Youth Leaders Programme and Youth Hostels. 

5 
 
                      (para 10.3) 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed that the observation/ recommendation of the Committee is noted for 
compliance and matter will be taken up with Ministry of Finance through IFD. 
 
Recommendation  
 
6. It is recognized that though this programme is already permeating through the lengths and 
breadth of the country at a fast rate, it is important to recommend that the reach of the programme should 
further be increased to all 117 aspirational districts of the country so that the benefits of the RYSK trickle 
down to every corner of the country and help in associating the youth in the nation building process. 
                             (para 10.4) 
 
 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed that as per the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee, the Department will ensure to focus on these 117 aspirational Districts. Besides the core 
programmes of NYKS, schemes of Department of Youth Affairs and collaborative projects and 
programmes will also be part of intervention for capacity building of the youth in these Districts, so that 
they participate and contribute in the nation building process.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
OBJECTIVES AND FEATURES OF THE SUB-SCHEMES  
 
NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS) 
 
Recommendation  
1. The Committee takes note of activities undertaken by the NYKS in the field of education, 
environment, spreading awareness on social issues, health, disaster relief and rehabilitation. The 
Committee also takes note of a number of core programmes conducted under NYKS and appreciates the 
Department for providing opportunity to the youth of the country for their holistic development and 
utilization of their potential through NYKS. The Committee also appreciates the efforts of the Department 
for inspiring/motivating them to contribute in Nation Building. 
(para 2.1.7) 
Action Taken 
The observation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 The Committee observes that it is imperative for NYKS to establish linkage between 
voluntary and actual problem solving. The United Nations Development Programme in 2022 had 
observed that volunteering efforts of youth in NYKS especially with respect to disaster is not 
streamlined. In view of this, the Committee recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs 
should streamline disaster response activities of NYKS volunteers by integrating such youth 
clubs/initiatives with Village level committees that are make mandatory under the Disaster 
Management Act 2005 and disaster management plans at district, block and village level. This will 
benefit the States which have highest number of NYKS volunteers trained by National Disaster 
Relief Force (NDRF) and a positive shift in perception of volunteerism among youth volunteers. 
The Committee also recommends the Department should establish Disaster Risk Reduction Teams 
in each district of the country, consisting of youth volunteers from NYKS. 
 
 
POSSIBLE ROLE OF NYKS IN SKILL DEVELOPMENT OF YOUTH 
 
Recommendation  
2. The Committee observes that Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports has sufficient infrastructure 
available to begin with, and that the Department should seriously explore possibility of developing NYKs 
in each district as District Youth Resource Centre (DYRC). In order to further expand its reach, the 
Committee recommends that Department should approach Ministry of Finance for additional requisite 
resources and funds to establish the NYKS as centres of upskilling for the youths of the country. The 
Committee also feels that if, NYKS are developed as District Youth Resource Centres, it will enable each 
District NYKS to act as a One Stop Centre for all youth related information focusing on Employment, 
Entrepreneurship, Education and Skill Development, which will be of immense value for the youth of the 
country. 
(para 2.3.5) 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed that recommendation of Committee is noted and Department of 

7 
 
Youth Affairs will approach Ministry of Finance for additional requisite resources through budgetary 
process. 
Comments of the Committee  
 
The Committee recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs should pursue the matter 
proactively with Ministry of Finance for additional requisite resources to develop NYKs in each 
district as District Youth Resource Centre (DYRC) and One Stop Centre for Youth at the earliest 
and keep the Committee apprised regarding outcome of the same. 
 
Recommendation  
3. The Committee notes that NYKS has requisite infrastructure and an impressive presence across 
623 districts of the country. The Committee therefore, recommends that Ministry of Youth Affairs and 
Sports should take up with Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship to develop and promote 
NYKs for the skilling, re-skilling, up-skilling and experiential learning of aspiring youth. Further, the 
Department should strive to collaborate with Ministry of Labour and Employment to develop NYKS as 
employment gateways in each district of the country. 
(para 2.3.6) 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed that as per Allocation of Business Rules the subject of skill 
development and entrepreneurship is with a different Ministry. The views of Committee are being 
intimated to Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
The Committee had recommended that the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports should 
take up the matter with the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship to develop and 
promote NYKs for skilling, re-skilling, up skilling and experimental learning of youths.  The 
Committee further had also recommended that Department should strive to collaborate with 
Ministry of Labour and Employment to develop NYKs as employment gateways in each district of 
the country. 
However, Ministry in response to above recommendations has informed the Committee that 
as per Allocation of Business Rules, the subject of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship is with 
a different Ministry and i.e. Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship and the view of 
the Committee is being intimated to them.  
The Committee is aware of the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961. 
The Committee also takes note of the action taken by Ministry vis-a-vis its recommendations.  
However, the Committee invites attention of the Ministry towards Constitutional provision of 
"Collective Responsibility" of Ministries/Departments of Government. Further, the Ministry is 
silent about collaboration with Ministry of Labour and Employment to develop NYKS as 
employment gateways in each district of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends to 
proactively pursue both the parts of recommendation with Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship and Ministry of Labour and Employment and keep the Committee apprised 
regarding the outcome. 

8 
 
Further, given the wide range of schemes run by various Ministries -the startup Incubation 
Centres, Mentorship programs, Skill India, Atal Innovation Mission, Pradhan Mangtri Kaushal 
Vikas Yojana- it is imperative for the Department  to align these schemes and make them accessible 
to the youth.  Moreover, the Committee also observes that given their wide social reach and 
geographic dispersion, NYKs are well-poised to undertake this role, and create opportunities for 
greater collaboration with Government and Civil Society organizations in the future.   
 
Recommendation  
4. The Committee further recommends that Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports should set up 'Girl 
Child Specific NYK Centres' in each district of the country to provide equal opportunity to girl child for 
their upskilling and to ensure employment opportunity to girls in collaboration with Ministry of Skill 
Development and Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
(para 2.3.7) 
Action Taken 
The Department has stated that priority to girls/women will be emphasized in District Youth 
Resource Centres (DYRCs) in future collaboration programmes with Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE), so that focused attention may be given to the female population in terms of 
employment, skilling and education. Ministry of Labour & Employment shall also be consulted for the 
same. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
The Committee observes that the Department has not taken up the matter of setting up of 
'Girl Child specific NYK Centers', so far, with the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship and Ministry of Labour and Employment.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates 
its recommendation at Para 2.3.7 of its 354th Report that the Ministry should expedite the issue to 
provide equal opportunity to girl child for their upskilling and ensuring employment opportunity 
for them. The Committee be apprised of the developments in this regards.  
NATIONAL YOUTH CORPS (NYC) 
 
Recommendation  
5. The Committee takes note of a number of voluntary activities undertaken by the Department of 
Youth Affairs and interest generated among the youth through social media about National Youth 
Parliament Festival. Considering the significant role played by National Youth Volunteers in effective 
implementation of schemes in the field, the Committee recommends that remuneration of amount of 
Rs.5000/- per month for volunteers needs enhancement. Enhanced honorarium will help in further 
motivating and attracting a significant number of volunteers leading to increase in the coverage of the 
scheme. These volunteers can help to bridge the digital divide by creating awareness particularly in 
rural areas. 
(para 3.6) 
 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed the Committee that as per observations of the Committee, the 
proposal for enhancing the monthly honorarium of NYVs under the NYC Scheme to be taken up with 
the concerned Ministry for necessary consideration. 
 

9 
 
Comments of the Committee  
The Committee expresses its anguish over the fact that Department has not taken up the 
proposal for enhancing the monthly remuneration of National Youth Volunteers (NYVs), so far. 
The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Department should take up the 
matter of enhancing the monthly honorarium of NYVs with the Ministry concerned and apprise 
the Committee, at the earliest. 
 
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION 
Recommendation  
6. The Committee appreciates the activities undertaken under the International Co-operation sub-
scheme particularly Youth 20 under G20 and Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) Youth 
Conference. The Committee hopes that more such activities will take place in the year of G20 Presidency 
of India. The Committee observes that more students should be chosen from rural and far-flung areas of 
the country under International Co-operation for enhancing their exposure to global ideas, opportunities, 
values and best practices. 
(para 5.5) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has stated that under International Cooperation Scheme of its Department of Youth 
Affairs, Indian Youth Delegates are nominated by this Department from diverse fields for which 
nominations are sought with the approval of competent authority from various reputed  universities/ 
institutions/ organizations through Ministry of Education, etc., including volunteers from National 
Service Scheme (NSS - Student Youth Volunteers) and Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS - Rural 
Youth Volunteers), the two major youth organisations under this Department, to participate through 
physical/virtual mode in the International Youth Exchange Programme (IYEP), Summits, etc., Further, 
while selecting the youth for such programmes, the Department strives to maintain gender and regional 
balance including the youth from the rural and far flung areas. 
Comments of the Committee  
 The Committee takes note of the action taken by the Department in response to 
recommendation of the Committee. However, the Department has not given any details about the 
inclusion of youth be chosen from rural and far-flung areas of the country under International Co-
operation not it has provided the details about inclusion of youth from tier 2 and tier 3 
colleges/institutes in these programs. The Committee, therefore, recommends all International 
Cooperation Schemes must be tracked for long term impact of international programs on youth 
and directs the Department of Youth Affairs to furnish details of youth chosen from rural, far-flung 
areas of the country, tier 2 and tier 3 colleges/institutes in  under these International Co-operation 
programs to the Committee at the earliest. 
 
 
YOUTH HOSTELS (YH)  
 
Recommendation  
7. On the basis of discussions held with the Department on the state of Youth Hostels, the 
Committee finds that the number of Youth Hostels need to be increased and provision of providing 
support staff should also be explored. The Committee is of the view that the Department should monitor 
quality standards, hygiene and infrastructure of Youth Hostels for meeting the ambitions of India's 
youth. 
(para 6.6) 

10 
 
 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed the Committee that the Department has sought more funds under 
YH Scheme for FY 2024-25 for making budget provisions under relevant head of the Youth Hostel 
Scheme for considerations of proposals that may be received from the State Governments  for 
construction of new Youth Hostels.  
 
It was also informed that regarding the provision of support staff, it is submitted that as per 
provisions contained in the Youth Hostel Manual, the appointment of Manager and Warden is done by 
the Central Government. The remaining staff is hired by Hostel Management Committee chaired by 
DC/ DM/ Secretary, D/o Youth Affairs (YA) of the concerned State, on need basis. Such staff is paid 
salary from the funds available in bank account of youth hostel. As regards maintaining quality 
standards of youth hostels, it is stated that as on date, 19 Youth Hostels are ISO:2015 certified. The 
Ministry is pursuing with remaining Youth Hostels as well to obtain ISO certification to maintain their 
quality standards. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
The Committee notes and appreciates the Ministry's attempts to secure ISO:2015 
certification for the Youth Hostels.  However, it would like to enquire about the delay in securing 
such certification for all hostels and any constraints the Ministry faces in this regard. It is also not 
evident that the certification alone will guarantee quality standards, hygiene and infrastructure for 
the hostels as envisioned by the Committee.  For instance, hostels should be equipped with Wi-Fi 
connectivity, secure locks, CCTV cameras, and round-the-clock security-all of which may fall 
outside the domain of such certification.  Moreover, the Departments should ensure a mechanism in 
place to seek feedback from hostellers and implement corrective action based on it.  
 
Recommendation  
8. The Committee observes that there is acute shortage of Youth Hostels for girls in the country. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs should construct Youth 
Hostels exclusively for girls in every capital city of each State. Further Youth Hostels for girls should 
also be constructed at places of educational centres, tourist destinations and places of historical and 
cultural value to facilitate them. 
(para 6.7) 
 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed the Committee that the Youth Hostels cater to accommodation 
for both boys and girls in Youth hostels and separate dormitories are there for boys and girls. The 
Ministry appoints Manager and his lady kin as warden to look after the needs of both boys and girls 
staying in the Youth Hostels. As per provisions of the Youth Hostel Manual, hostels are constructed at 
places of educational centres, tourist destinations and historical and cultural value. 
 
It was also informed that a Youth Hostel at Kota, Rajasthan is currently under construction. 
More funds have been sought under Budget Estimates 2024-25 under the youth hostel scheme for 
keeping a provision for construction of more Youth hostels. Proposals for construction of more Youth 
hostels will be considered by the Ministry upon receipt of proposals from the State Governments 
subject to viability of proposals, availability of funds and the approval of the component authority. 
 

11 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
The Committee had recommended for construction of Youth Hostels for girls exclusively in 
the Capital cities of all the States/UTs in view of difficulties being faced by them. However, it is 
observed that the Department is silent in its Action Taken Note (ATN) in this regard. Further, only 
one Youth Hostel, at Kota is currently under construction. At this pace, the Committee apprehends 
that the Department may not be able to achieve the target of construction of Youth Hostels for girls 
exclusively to facilitate them in every capital city of States/UTs, places of educational centres, 
tourist destinations and places of historical and cultural values. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should seek additional funds in 
Union Budget 2025-26 and ensure construction of Youth Hostels exclusively for girls in capital city 
of each State/UT, places of educational centres, tourist destinations and places of historical and 
cultural values to facilitate the girl students of the country, as recommended earlier by the 
Committee. The Committee may be apprised of the developments taking place in this regard. 
 
 
ASSISTANCE TO SCOUTING & GUIDING ORGANISATIONS  
 
Recommendation  
9. The Committee takes note of events conducted under the Scouts and Guides Associations sub-
scheme and grants released to Bharat Scouts and Guides. The Committee also appreciates the good work 
done by the Scouts and Guides Associations over the years in the nook and corners of the country. The 
Committee feels that the Scouts and Guides Association needs to increase its activities by developing a 
comprehensive eco-system of camps focusing on skill development, digital literacy and awareness about 
various schemes and programmes of the Government. 
(para 7.5)  
 
Action Taken 
The Department of Youth Affairs has mentioned that the Recommendation of the Committee has 
been noted for compliance. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee notes the action taken by the Department of Youth Affairs and observes 
that no compliance report has been sent to the Committee with respect to the Recommendation of 
the Committee contained in 354th Report. The Committee further observes that although the Scout 
and Guide movement has a rich history, there is still a gap in awareness about the benefits of 
participation in Scouts and Guides programs, particularly in rural areas. Additionally, many 
schools do not have dedicated Scout and Guide units, which limits the outreach of these programs.  
 The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports to 
engage school children with gender sensitization, environment protection initiatives, skill 
development, digital literacy and awareness about various schemes and programmes of the 
Government and furnish the compliance report in this regard to the Committee at the earliest. 
 
 
 
NATIONAL YOUNG LEADERS PROGRAMME  
 

12 
 
Recommendation  
10. The Committee also observes that during the financial year 2019-20, Rs.978 crore were allocated 
out of which 903 crore were utilized. Similarly, in the financial year 2022-23, Rs. 1056 crore were 
allocated, out of which Rs. 856 crore have been utilized as per the provisional un-audited figures 
furnished by the Ministry. 
(para 8.5) 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed that the information/figures mentioned in para 8.3 & 8.5 of the 
Report was obtained from Young Leaders Programmes (YLP) Scheme and are not correct. The correct 
information, as per Govt. of India records/Appropriation Accounts, year-wise BE, RE and Actual 
expenditure under YLP Scheme is as under: - 
 
Explanatory Note from IFD 
(i) Total expenditure under NYLP scheme from 2018-19 to 2022-23 as per Annual Appropriation 
Accounts is not tallying with figures given in Table IX under Para 8.3 (Except expenditure 
figure of Financial Year 2022-23) 
(ii) Figures given in Table IX under Para 8.3 are in Rs. Lakh, whereas figures given in Para 8.5 are 
in Rs. crore. 
(iii) Expenditure figures of FY 2019-20 in Table IX are Rs.943 lakh, whereas it has been 
mentioned as Rs.903 crore in Para 8.5. 
(iv) Similarly expenditure figures of FY 2022-23 in Table IX are Rs.847 lakh, whereas it has been 
mentioned as Rs.856 crore in Para 8.5. 
                                                    
          (Rs. in crore) 
Year Budget 
Estimate 
(BE) 
Revised 
Estimate 
(RE) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
2018-19 20.00 20.00 9.88 
2019-20 12.00 27.95 10.61 
2020-21 22.00 4.35 2.70 
2021-22 14.00 8.00 4.66 
2022-23 12.00 12.00 8.47 
 
Comments of the Committee  
  The Committee notes the corrected and detailed reply furnished in the Action Taken 
Notes furnished by the Ministry. However, the Committee is of the view that correct reply/ figure 
with due diligence and after proper vetting by the authority concerned should be furnished for its 
consideration. 
 
NEW INITIATIVES  
 
Recommendation  
11. The Committee takes note of new initiatives taken by the Ministry namely Yuva Portal, Yuva 
Samvad and Yuva Utsav. The Committee hopes that through these programmes more and more youth 
would made part of these initiatives especially the marginalized groups such as Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes and Women in order to effectively meet the target of empowerment of youth. 
(para 9.4) 
Action Taken 

13 
 
The Department of Youth Affairs has mentioned that the Recommendation of the Committee has 
been noted for compliance. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee notes that the Department of Youth Affairs has noted the recommendation 
of the Committee for compliance. However, Department has not furnished any compliance report 
in its action taken note. The Committee further observes that the Department should take serious 
initiatives to incorporate Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Women, Linguistic Minorities and 
other marginalized groups in order to effectively meet the target of empowerment of youth as a part 
of Yuva Samvad and Yuva Utsav. Moreover, the Committee also recommends that the Department 
should ensure the names of initiatives for empowerment of youth should be compulsorily in Hindi, 
English and regional languages to ensure better participation of youth and to create a sense of 
belongingness for the youth. The Committee further directs the Department to furnish compliance 
report at the earliest for consideration of Committee.  

14 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE 
STILL AWAITED 
 
OBJECTIVES AND FEATURES OF THE SUB-SCHEMES  
 
NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS) 
 
Recommendation  
1. The Committee also takes note of the fact that NYKS conducts numerous programmes voluntarily 
in co-ordination with Ministries of Culture, Education, Health, AYUSH, Law, Micro, Small & Medium 
Enterprises, Road Transport & Highways and Tourism. The Committee observes that to achieve better 
synergy and convergence for better implementation of the sub-schemes NYKS should initiate further 
voluntary co-ordination with the Ministries of Culture, Education, Home Affairs, Information Technology 
and Communication, Law and Justice, Skill Development and Entrepreneurship and Women & Child 
Development in the following fields: 
 
Ministry of Education: Yuva Utsav which is a core activity under NYKS should be restructured on the 
lines of Kashi Tamil Samagam. The Committee recommends that Yuva Kashi Tamil Samagam should be 
organized for promoting national integration among youth in collaboration with Ministry of Culture. The 
Committee recommends that volunteers of NYKS in collaboration with Ministry of Education should 
explore to bridge the learning gap that occurred due to COVID- 19 among the school children. This 
particularly in view of the fact that on-line classes though helped tide over COVID-19 Pandemic crisis 
but use of technology has had its own effect on the school children. 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs: Volunteers of NYKS should be trained in disaster management activities and 
every District Magistrate should prepare a list of these volunteers in order to rope them in for quick 
response against any natural disaster in collaboration with Ministry of Home Affairs, Disaster 
Management Authorities of Centre and State concerned. 
 
Ministry of Electronics Information Technology and Ministry of Communication: The Committee is of the 
opinion that volunteers of NYKS in collaboration with Common Service Centres (CSCs) can extend digital 
and financial literacy among rural people under the PM Gramin Digital Saksharta Mission 
(PMGDISHA) in collaboration with Ministry of Information Technology and Ministry of Communication. 
 
Ministry of Law and Justice: The Committee recommends that volunteers of NYKS who are Law 
graduates in voluntarily collaboration with Ministry of Law and Justice should be asked to provide pro 
bono legal assistance to marginalised citizens under the NyayBandhu Scheme. 
 
Ministry of Women and Child Development: The Committee observes that with its huge number of 
volunteers, NYKS can help in developing PoshanVatikas and Shri Anna Vatikas under Mission POSHAN 
2.0 in collaboration with Ministry of Women and Child Development. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports should take up the matter with the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development to include their voluntary service for more effective implementation of the 
mission POSHAN 2.0. 
(para 2.1.8) 
 

15 
 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed the Committee the following details: 
 
Ministry of Education: 
 Yuva Kashi Tamil Samagam: The Department has taken note of recommendation of the 
Committee for necessary compliance. It is, however, submitted that the template of 
programme of Yuva Utsav is different from the Kashi Tamil Samagam. Whereas Yuva 
Utsav is organized initially at District, then at State and finally at National Level on 
competitive pattern, Kashi Tamil Samagam is similar to the pattern of Ek Bharat Shrestha 
Bharat Programme. Therefore, as recommended by the Parliamentary Standing Committee, 
a Project Proposal may be considered in the Department after internal consultation by 
NYKS. 
 
 The Committee has further been informed that the matter is being taken up with the 
Department of School Education, Ministry of Education, to share the learning gap among  
school children (that occurred due to COVID- 19) and also  consider  a brainstorming 
session along with the officials of NYKS to explore possibility of collaboration  to address 
the issues. 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs:  
 In FY 2019-20 and in FY 2022-23, through its core programme, NYKS in collaboration 
with National Disaster Response Force, trained 8312 and 4109 volunteers respectively 
from hazard prone Districts in the field of Disaster Management. The concerned District 
Youth Officers (DYOs) were instructed to share the details of trained volunteers with the 
respective DCs/DMs. In addition, a digital repository of the trained volunteers is also 
available on the NYKS website. To access the data, login credentials are shared with 
DCs/DMs by concerned DYOs. Another project named, “Yuva Aapda Mitra Scheme” in 
collaboration with National Disaster Management Authority is in pipeline for training 
50,000 NYKS volunteers in 3 years. The State wise and District wise number of trained 
volunteers is given in Table 1 and Table 2 as under for the year 2019-20 and FY 2022-23, 
respectively: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
Table 1: Disaster Response Teams of NYKS Youth Volunteers for Disaster Risk Reduction 
(FY-2019-20) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
S. No. State/ UT S. No. Di strict No. of volunteers 
trained by NDRF 
1. Assam  1.   Dhubri 450 
2. Tripura 2.   West Tripura 270 
3. Meghalaya 3.   East Khasi Hills 330 
4. West Bengal 4.   Kolkata (Metropolitan) 330 
5. Sikkim 5.   East Sikkim 262 
6. Odisha 6.   Khordha 300 
7. Tamil Nadu 
  
7.  Chennai 300 
8.  Thiruvarur 300 
8. Kerala 9.   Ernakulam 394 
9. Maharashtra 10.   Thane 209 
10. Gujarat 
  
11.  Rajkot 301 
12.  Navsari 101 
11. Rajasthan 13.   Bharatpur 300 
12. Jammu Kashmir 
  
14.  Kargil 145 
15.  Udhampur 300 
13. Punjab 16.   Ludhiana 309 
14. Himachal Pradesh 17.   Kangra 400 
15. 
  
  
Uttar Pradesh 
  
  
18.  Ghaziabad 120 
19.  Meerut 343 
20.  Varanasi 100 
16. Uttarakhand 21.   Chamoli 198 
17. Delhi 22.   Alipur (North) 81 
18. Haryana 23.   Sonipat 172 
19. Bihar 24.   Bhagalpur 480 
20. Jharkhand 25.   Deoghar 265 

17 
 
 
  
21. Telangana 1.   Khammam 300 
22. Andhra Pradesh 2.   Vizianagaram 420 
23. Karnataka 3.   Udupi 180 
24. Madhya Pradesh 4.   Indore 118 
25. Nagaland 5.   Kohima 148 
26. Arunachal Pradesh 6.   East Siang 180 
27. 
  
Manipur 
  
7.  Imphal West 116 
8.  Thoubal 90 
  Total    8312 

18 
 
Table 2: Establishing Disaster Risk Reduction Teams (FY2022-23) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Electronics Information Technology and Ministry of Communication:   
 Ministry of Electronics, Information Technology and Ministry of Communication shall be 
approached to schedule a meeting along with officials of NYKS to discuss the possibility of 
involvement of NYVs & other NYKS volunteers in the PMGDISHA program. Meanwhile IEC for 
the program as well as family mobilization for the enrolment of members in PMGDISHA shall 
also be taken up in coordination with MEITY. 
 
S. No. Name of District Name of State No. of volunteers 
trained in FY2022-23 
1 Dibrugarh Assam 180 
2 EastSikkim Sikkim 42 
3 West Sikkim 28 
4 North Sikkim 7 
5 South Sikkim 37 
6 Pudukkottai Tamilnadu 390 
7 Kannauj Uttar Pradesh 239 
8 Uttarkashi Uttarakhand 180 
9 North24Paraganas WestBengal 666 
10 Sitamarhi Bihar 510 
11 Jagatsinghpur Odisha 240 
12 Bagalkot Karnataka 270 
13 Palanpur/Banaskantha Gujarat 420 
14 Yamunanagar Haryana 210 
15 Aizwal Mizoram 150 
16 WestKameng ArunachalPradesh  180 
17 Kozhikkode Kerala 360 
 Total  4109 

19 
 
Ministry of Law and Justice:  
 Matter being taken up with the Ministry of Law & Justice for formal coordination and their 
support to explore possibilities of taking up of IEC components  on Nyay Bandhu Scheme through 
NYKS.  Meanwhile, directions will also be issued by NYKS to the existing law graduate NYVs to 
enrol in the scheme. 
 
Ministry of Women and Child Development:  
 It has been a major partner in the implementation of Poshan Maah programme across the country 
since 2018. As part of this, District Nehru Yuva Kendras do motivate NYVs and members of Youth 
Clubs to sensitize the villagers on the issues of malnutrition, importance of balanced diet, traditional 
food in collaboration with District Administration, Anganwadi, ASHA Workers for effective 
implementation of the designated activities under Poshan Maah Programme. However, in order to 
disseminate information on developing Poshan Vatika and Shri Anna Vatikas under Mission 
POSHAN 2.0, orientation training needs to be given to the Youth Volunteers. Besides, IEC material 
should also be provided by MoW&CD. In this regard, a formal communication will be sent by the 
Department of Youth Affairs to MoW&CD. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry of Education, Ministry of Electronics 
Information Technology and Ministry of Communication, Ministry of Law and Justice and 
Ministry of Women and Child Development and treats it as interim reply. The Committee  observes 
that the initial steps/measures taken by these Ministries needs to be closely monitored and followed 
up by the authorities concerned, The Committee further, recommends that Ministry of Education, 
Ministry of Electronics Information Technology and Ministry of Communication, Ministry of Law 
and Justice and Ministry of Women and Child Development should closely monitor the progress 
and accordingly inform the Committee about the final conclusion drawn in the matter.` 
 
    

20 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE 
 
NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS) 
 
1. The Committee observes that it is imperative for NYKS to establish linkage between 
voluntary and actual problem solving. The United Nations Development Programme in 2022 had 
observed that volunteering efforts of youth in NYKS especially with respect to disaster is not 
streamlined. In view of this, the Committee recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs 
should streamline disaster response activities of NYKS volunteers by integrating such youth 
clubs/initiatives with Village level committees that are make mandatory under the Disaster 
Management Act 2005 and disaster management plans at district, block and village level. This will 
benefit the States which have highest number of NYKS volunteers trained by National Disaster 
Relief Force (NDRF) and a positive shift in perception of volunteerism among youth volunteers. 
The Committee also recommends the Department should establish Disaster Risk Reduction Teams 
in each district of the country, consisting of youth volunteers from NYKS. 
(Para 2.1.7) 
2. The Committee recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs should pursue the 
matter proactively with Ministry of Finance for additional requisite resources to develop NYKs in 
each district as District Youth Resource Centre (DYRC) and One Stop Centre for Youth at the 
earliest and keep the Committee apprised regarding outcome of the same. 
                                                                                                    (Para 2.3.5)  
3. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
should take up the matter with the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship to develop 
and promote NYKs for skilling, re-skilling, up skilling and experimental learning of youths.  The 
Committee further had also recommended that Department should strive to collaborate with 
Ministry of Labour and Employment to develop NYKs as employment gateways in each district of 
the country. 
However, Ministry in response to above recommendations has informed the Committee that 
as per Allocation of Business Rules, the subject of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship is with 
a different Ministry and i.e. Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship and the view of 
the Committee is being intimated to them.  
The Committee is aware of the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961. 
The Committee also takes note of the action taken by Ministry vis-a-vis its recommendations.  
However, the Committee invites attention of the Ministry towards Constitutional provision of 
"Collective Responsibility" of Ministries/Departments of Government. Further, the Ministry is 
silent about collaboration with Ministry of Labour and Employment to develop NYKS as 
employment gateways in each district of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends to 
proactively pursue both the parts of recommendation with Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship and Ministry of Labour and Employment and keep the Committee apprised 
regarding the outcome. 
Further, given the wide range of schemes run by various Ministries -the startup Incubation 
Centres, Mentorship programs, Skill India, Atal Innovation Mission, Pradhan Mangtri Kaushal 

21 
 
Vikas Yojana- it is imperative for the Department  to align these schemes and make them accessible 
to the youth.  Moreover, the Committee also observes that given their wide social reach and 
geographic dispersion, NYKs are well-poised to undertake this role, and create opportunities for 
greater collaboration with Government and Civil Society organizations in the future.   
                                                                                                                                          (Para 2.3.6) 
4. The Committee observes that the Department has not taken up the matter of setting 
up of 'Girl Child specific NYK Centers', so far, with the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship and Ministry of Labour and Employment.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates 
its recommendation at Para 2.3.7 of its 354th Report that the Ministry should expedite the issue to 
provide equal opportunity to girl child for their upskilling and ensuring employment opportunity 
for them. The Committee be apprised of the developments in this regards.  
                                                                                                                                                (Para 2.3.7) 
NATIONAL YOUTH CORPS  
5. The Committee expresses its anguish over the fact that Department has not taken up 
the proposal for enhancing the monthly remuneration of National Youth Volunteers (NYVs), so 
far. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Department should take up the 
matter of enhancing the monthly honorarium of NYVs with the Ministry concerned and apprise 
the Committee, at the earliest. 
 
                                                                                                                   (Para 3.6) 
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION 
 
6. The Committee takes note of the action taken by the Department in response to 
recommendation of the Committee. However, the Department has not given any details about the 
inclusion of youth be chosen from rural and far-flung areas of the country under International Co-
operation not it has provided the details about inclusion of youth from tier 2 and tier 3 
colleges/institutes in these programs. The Committee, therefore, recommends all International 
Cooperation Schemes must be tracked for long term impact of international programs on youth 
and directs the Department of Youth Affairs to furnish details of youth chosen from rural, far-
flung areas of the country, tier 2 and tier 3 colleges/institutes in  under these International Co-
operation programs to the Committee at the earliest. 
(Para 5.5) 
 
 
 
 
YOUTH HOSTELS 
 
7. The Committee notes and appreciates the Ministry's attempts to secure ISO:2015 
certification for the Youth Hostels.  However, it would like to enquire about the delay in securing 
such certification for all hostels and any constraints the Ministry faces in this regard. It is also not 
evident that the certification alone will guarantee quality standards, hygiene and infrastructure for 

22 
 
the hostels as envisioned by the Committee.  For instance, hostels should be equipped with Wi-Fi 
connectivity, secure locks, CCTV cameras, and round-the-clock security-all of which may fall 
outside the domain of such certification.  Moreover, the Departments should ensure a mechanism in 
place to seek feedback from hostellers and implement corrective action based on it.  
(Para 6.6) 
8. The Committee had recommended for construction of Youth Hostels for girls 
exclusively in the Capital cities of all the States/UTs in view of difficulties being faced by them. 
However, it is observed that the Department is silent in its Action Taken Note (ATN) in this regard. 
Further, only one Youth Hostel, at Kota is currently under construction. At this pace, the 
Committee apprehends that the Department may not be able to achieve the target of construction of 
Youth Hostels for girls exclusively to facilitate them in every capital city of States/UTs, places of 
educational centres, tourist destinations and places of historical and cultural values. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should seek additional funds in 
Union Budget 2025-26 and ensure construction of Youth Hostels exclusively for girls in capital city 
of each State/UT, places of educational centres, tourist destinations and places of historical and 
cultural values to facilitate the girl students of the country, as recommended earlier by the 
Committee. The Committee may be apprised of the developments taking place in this regard. 
                                                      
(Para 6.7) 
ASSISTANCE TO SCOUTING & GUIDING ORGANISATIONS  
 
9. The Committee notes the action taken by the Department of Youth Affairs and 
observes that no compliance report has been sent to the Committee with respect to the 
Recommendation of the Committee contained in 354th Report. The Committee further observes 
that although the Scout and Guide movement has a rich history, there is still a gap in awareness 
about the benefits of participation in Scouts and Guides programs, particularly in rural areas. 
Additionally, many schools do not have dedicated Scout and Guide units, which limits the outreach 
of these programs.  
 The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports to 
engage school children with gender sensitization, environment protection initiatives, skill 
development, digital literacy and awareness about various schemes and programmes of the 
Government and furnish the compliance report in this regard to the Committee at the earliest. 
 
(Para 7.5) 
NATIONAL YOUNG LEADERS PROGRAMME  
10. The Committee notes the corrected and detailed reply furnished in the Action Taken 
Notes furnished by the Ministry. However, the Committee is of the view that correct reply/ figure 
with due diligence and after proper vetting by the authority concerned should be furnished for its 
consideration. 
                                                                                                                                            (Para 8.5) 
NEW INITIATIVES  
 
  
 
 11. The Committee notes that the Department of Youth Affairs has noted the 
recommendation of the Committee for compliance. However, Department has not furnished any 

23 
 
compliance report in its action taken note. The Committee further observes that the Department 
should take serious initiatives to incorporate Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Women, 
Linguistic Minorities and other marginalized groups in order to effectively meet the target of 
empowerment of youth as a part of Yuva Samvad and Yuva Utsav. Moreover, the Committee also 
recommends that the Department should ensure the names of initiatives for empowerment of youth 
should be compulsorily in Hindi, English and regional languages to ensure better participation of 
youth and to create a sense of belongingness for the youth. The Committee further directs the 
Department to furnish compliance report at the earliest for consideration of Committee. 
 
(Para 9.4) 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE 
STILL AWAITED 
 
12. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry of Education, Ministry of Electronics 
Information Technology and Ministry of Communication, Ministry of Law and Justice and 
Ministry of Women and Child Development and treats it as interim reply. The Committee  observes 
that the initial steps/measures taken by these Ministries needs to be closely monitored and followed 
up by the authorities concerned, The Committee further, recommends that Ministry of Education, 
Ministry of Electronics Information Technology and Ministry of Communication, Ministry of Law 
and Justice and Ministry of Women and Child Development should closely monitor the progress 
and accordingly inform the Committee about the final conclusion drawn in the matter.` 
 
                                                                     (Para 2.1.8) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
MINUTES 
 
  

25 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, 
CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 9:30 A.M. on Monday, 
the 16th December, 2024 in Committee Room- ‘1’, Block A, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1.       Shri Digvijaya Singh    - Chairman 
2.         Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
3.         Dr. Sikander Kumar  
4.         Smt. Sunetra Ajit Pawar 
5.         Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
6.        Dr. Angomcha Bimol Akoijam 
7.        Smt. Shobhanaben Mahendrasinh Baraiya 
8.        Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary  
9.        Shri Jitendra Kumar Dohare 
10.      Prof. Varsha Eknath Gaikwad 
11.      Dr. Hemang Joshi 
12.      Adv Dean Kuriakose 
13.      Dr. D Purandeswari 
14.      Shri Rajeev Rai 
15.      Shri Zia Ur Rehman 
16.      Shri Karan Bhushan Singh 
 17.     Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
18.      Dr. T Sumathy Alias Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary                                                                                                                                                                                                     
2. Shri J. K. Mallick, Director 
3. Smt. A.S. Chakravani, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
  
 

26 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He, then, 
informed that the agenda for the meeting was to consider and adopt the following draft Reports as under- 
a) 360th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations 
contained in the 354th report on "Review of Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakram (RYSK)" 
pertaining to the Department of Youth Affairs, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports; 
b) * * * 
2. The Committee, thereafter, discussed the aforesaid draft Reports one by one and after brief 
discussion, decided to consider and adopt these Reports during the next meeting of Committee on 
20th December, 2024 
3. The meeting adjourned at 10:17 A.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                       J.K. Mallick  
16th December, 2024                                                                                            Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** Pertains to other matters 
  

27 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, 
CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 9:45 A.M. on Friday, 
the 20th December, 2024 in Committee Room- ‘1’, Block A, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
3.       Shri Digvijaya Singh    - Chairman 
2.         Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
3.         Ms. Sushmita Dev 
4.         Dr. Sikander Kumar 
5.         Smt. Sunetra Ajit Pawar 
6.         Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
7.         Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
8.        Dr. Angomcha Bimol Akoijam 
9.        Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary  
10.      Shri Jitendra Kumar Dohare 
11.      Prof. Varsha Eknath Gaikwad 
12.      Adv Dean Kuriakose 
13.      Dr. Sambit Patra 
14.      Shri Rajeev Rai 
15.      Shri Zia Ur Rehman 
16.      Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
17.      Dr. T Sumathy Alias Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
5. Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary                                                                                                                                                                                                     
6. Shri J. K. Mallick, Director 
7. Smt. A.S. Chakravani, Deputy Secretary 
8. Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
  
 

28 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He, then, 
informed that the agenda for the meeting was to consider and adopt the following draft Reports as under- 
a) 360th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations 
contained in the 354th report on "Review of Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakram (RYSK)" 
pertaining to the Department of Youth Affairs, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports; 
b) * * * 
4. The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports one by one and after brief 
discussion, adopted the 360th and *** Reports with certain modifications.  
5. Thereafter, the Committee decided to present/lay the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament 
during first week of the Budget Session, 2025 of the Parliament i.e. first week of February 2025. 
The Committee also authorized the Secretariat to correct patent errors and consequential changes 
in the said reports. 
6. The Committee also authorized Chairman of the Committee, to decide the names of Members for 
laying/presentation of Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha during the 
upcoming Budget Session as per their availability during the said Session. 
 5. The meeting adjourned at 10:15 A.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                       J.K. Mallick  
20th December, 2024                                                                                            Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** Pertains to other matter 
 