197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
HUNDRED NINETY- SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
CONTAINED IN HUNDRED EIGHTY-THIRD REPORT ON
MAJOR ISSUES CONCERNING KENDRIYA VIDYALAYAS
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17TH AUGUST, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 17TH AUGUST, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2007/SRAVANA, 1929 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
1.                  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     
2.                  PREFACE      
3.                  REPORT        
PART I           Recommendations/Observations either accepted by the Department or  having been satisfactorily
replied to by the Department.
PART II          Recommendations/Observations on which Committee has further commented upon
 
4.         OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE..
5.         MINUTES
6.         *ANNEXURES
*To be appended at printing stage.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2006-07)
 
1.      Shri Janardan Dwivedi              ¾                    Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
MEMBERS
 
2.
      Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3.      Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4.      Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
5.      Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
6.      Smt. Brinda Karat
7.      Shri Uday Pratap Singh
8.      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
9.      Smt. Supriya Sule
10.  Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.  Shri Ashok Argal
12.  Shri Basudeb Barman
13.  Shri Harishchandra Chavan
14.  Shri Harisinh Chavda
15.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan

197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
16.  Shri Ramswaroop Koli
17.  Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
18.  Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
19.  Smt. Archana Nayak
20.  Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
21.  Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
22.  Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
23.  Shri Chengara Surendran
24.  Dr. Thokchom Meinya
25.  Shri K. Virupakshappa
26.  Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
27.  Shri Francis K. George
28.  Shri Anantkumar Hegde
29.  Shri Rahul Gandhi
30.  Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
31.  Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Deputy Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Smt. Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
 
PREFACE
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development,
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Hundred Ninety-
seventh Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in its Hundred
Eighty-third Report on  Major Issues Concerning Kendriya Vidyalayas.
 
2.         The Hundred Eighty third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30
th November, 2006. 
Replies of the Government to the recommendations observations contained in the Report, were considered by the
Committee at its meeting held on the 17th July, 2007.
 
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 17th July, 2007.
NEW DELHI; 
July 17, 2007
Asadha 26, 1929 (Saka)
JANARDAN DWIVEDI
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development
 
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
its One Hundred Eighty-third Report on Major Issues concerning Kendriya Vidyalayas of the Department of School
Education & Literacy.  The Committee had presented the Hundred and Sixty-second Report, a detailed analysis of various
aspects concerning the functioning of Kendriya Vidyalayas, to the Parliament on the 28
th April, 2005.  While considering
the Action Taken Note on this Report received from the Department of Secondary and Higher Education (now Department
of School Education and Literacy), the Committee felt  that further clarifications were required on a number of important
issues.  The Committee, accordingly, held another series of extensive deliberations with all concerned and presented
another Report (183
rd) on the subject.
2.         While going through the Action Taken Notes received from the Department in respect of the recommendations

197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
contained in the 183 rd Report, the Committee observed that while in respect of some aspects, position had considerably
improved, there still remained some problem-areas where the Department needed to be more pro-active in tackling them.
3.           Present Report has been accordingly divided into two parts.  Part-I deals with Recommendations/Observations
either accepted by the Department or having been satisfactorily replied to by the Department . Part-II relates to those
recommendations/observations on which the Committee has further commented upon.
(i)         Part-I   Recommendations/Observations either accepted by the Department or having been satisfactorily replied to
by the Department.
2.1, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6
(Part I) Total – 05
(ii)        Part-II Recommendations/observations on which Committee has further commented upon.
2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 3.1, 3.2, 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 5.1, 6.1, 6.2, 7.1, 8.1, 8.2.
(Part II)  Total – 17
PART - I
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS EITHER ACCEPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT OR HAVING BEEN
SATISFACTORILY REPLIED TO BY THE DEPARTMENT
 
II.         NORMS FOR OPENING OF KENDRIYA VIDYALAYAS
 
Recommendations/Observation
2.1       Opening of Kendriya Vidyalayas is based on specific norms prescribed for this purpose by the Govt.  One of those
was the provision of 15 acres of land to be provided free of cost by the sponsoring agencies.  The Committee was informed
that this criterion had now been drastically reduced to 4.00 acres in a metropolitan city; a contiguous plot fairly leveled
measuring 6.00 acres in hilly terrain; 8.00 acres in urban area; and 10.00 acres in rural/semi urban area.  The Committee
appreciates that in view of the ever-increasing shortage of land in the present scenario, lowering the land requirement is
the need of the hour.  However, the Committee would like to emphasize that there should be no deviation from the need to
demarcate 40% as building area and 60% as play field of the 4.00 acres provided in a metropolitan city.
 
Action Taken
As suggested by the Committee due consideration is being given by KVS to demarcate 40% of the land for
building area and 60% as play field.
 
IV.       KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA BUILDINGS
Recommendations/Observations
4.3       The Committee observes that considerable time is taken in the various stages of construction including the delay,
sometimes, at the planning stage. What is more disturbing is that a large number of these KVs, has been opened way back
in eighties. The Committee understands that after a protracted procedure involving States/sponsoring agencies and
overcoming a number of hurdles, these KVs must have reached the stage when finally construction project could be
sanctioned. However, it appears that series of other procedural formalities are yet to be fulfilled, before the students could
pursue their studies in a proper environment having required infrastructure.
 
Recommendations/Observations
4.4       The Committee found that construction of another 28 school buildings was at the planning stage. The Committee
finds that these KVs are scattered in different State of the country, having various sponsoring agencies. The Committee is
concerned to note that out of these 28 KVs, no progress is expectedin 19 KVs, due to various reasons beyond the control
of KV Sangathan. In some cases construction agencies have not submitted even preliminary drawings and estimates. They
are reminded from time to time to expedite it. In such a situation the Committee is constrained to conclude that the
construction status of these KVs would continue to remain at the same stage. It appears that no agency is responsible and
KV Sangathan itself seems to have abdicated its responsibility/duty.
 
Action Taken
(4.3 & 4.4)
KVS works are being executed  through Govt. construction agencies as a “Deposit Work”, in which construction
agencies are responsible for planning, designing and execution of work as per their execution system of public work.
KVS’s role is to monitor the progress and release funds accordingly. In case of any hurdle and delay, KVS takes up the
matter with the Heads/site staff of concerned construction agencies. For proper and effective monitoring, review

197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
meetings/discussions are being made at various levels i.e.: -
(i)         Works Committee Meeting – under the Chairmanship of Joint  Secretary, HRD/Vice-Chairman, KVS – to review
the progress and other related problems.
(ii)        Review of works by Commissioner, KVS, with the Head of construction agency.
(iii)       Monthly review meetings at KVS level.
(iv)       Monitoring at Region level.
(v)        Monitoring at Vidyalaya level by Vidyalaya Monitoring Committee.
After transfer of suitable plot of land to a KV, construction works are entrusted to the Govt. construction agencies
and these are chased up regularly for submitting the drawings & estimate for issuing Admn. Approval and Exp. Sanction.
After the sanction is issued, Construction agency is regularly chased for early start of work by completing pre-tender
planning in time. On account of close monitoring as many as 32 school buildings have been got completed during this
period.
 
Recommendations/Observations
4.5       The Committee made an attempt to understand the factors primarily responsible for such a dismal situation with a
view to find a solution to break this impasse. The Committee summoned the DG, CPWD to discuss this problem as also to
understand his constraints. The Committee was given to understand that KV Sangathan has a well laid-out monitoring
mechanism functioning at different levels. The Committee, however, feels that this monitoring mechanism has not proved
to be very effective so far. The Committee observes that an initiative has been taken to simplify procedural formalities.
Henceforth, all sanction orders issued by KVS are to be forwarded to the concerned CPWD authorities by name. This
would result in eliminating undue delay occurring at various levels in KVS as well as in CPWD.
Action Taken
As regards, issuing of sanction order are concerned these are already being forwarded to the Heads of concerned
construction agency. However it is noted for compliance that in future all sanction orders will be issued by name to the
concerned authorities of CPWD.
 
Recommendations/Observations
4.6       Another problem noticed by the Committee was lack of co-ordination between the civil and electrical wings of
CPWD. This also, the Committee found, leads to unnecessary delays in this regards. The Committee is happy to note that
CPWD has since introduced a composite tendering system, where under electrical works inside the building are to be made
part of the main contract.
 
Action Taken
In the sanction order of school building project, KVS has already incorporated a clause of executing the work
through a composite tender.
PART-II
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH COMMITTEE HAS FURTHER COMMENTED UPON.
 
II.         NORMS FOR OPENING OF KENDRIYA VIDYALAYAS
 
Recommendations/Observations
2.2       The Committee came to know that out of 931 KVs in the country, there are 38 KVs where land had not been
provided by the sponsoring agencies even after several years, which in some cases is more than 20 to 25 years.  In the case
of as many as 27 KVs, sponsoring agencies were the Armed Forces.  The Committee notes that with the exception of two
KVs opened in the year, 2005-06, rest were opened between 1977-78 to 1997-98.  In the remaining 11 KVs also the
situation was, more or less, the same; the earliest KV was opened in 1973-74.  Details of such KVs reveal a very
discouraging picture.   The Committee hopes that with the revision of land norms, situation would improve.  The
Committee would like the Department of Secondary & Higher Education and KVS to vigorously pursue the allotment of
land with the concerned agencies and report the progress made in this regard to the Committee within three months.
 
Action Taken
Following efforts have been made to obtain land from the sponsoring agencies:
 
a)         The issues have been discussed by Ministry of Human Resource Development with concerned State Govt.
representatives in the regional level meetings.

197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
b)         Meetings have been held by KVS with  Ministries of Home Affairs, Finance & Defence.
c)         A series of D.O letters have been addressed by Commissioner to Officers of concerned Ministries of Government
of India and Chief Secretaries of States. As on date out of 919 functional KVs, land is yet to be provided in respect
of 126 KVs of which 35 cases are pending with Ministry of Defence, 8 with State Govts, and 12 with Ministries of
Home, Finance and Railways.  The present position of the 38 cases mentioned by the Committee is at Annexure-I.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee had identified 38 Kendriya Vidyalayas where land had not been made available by the sponsoring
agencies even after a lapse of 20-25 years in some cases.  The latest status report in respect of these 38 Kendriya
Vidyalayas reveals that position remains unchanged.  Correspondence/meetings at different levels with all concerned have
not yielded any desired results.  The Committee observes that in most of the cases although land had been finally
earmarked by the sponsors, approval of the Ministry of  Defence / concerned State Government was awaited. The
Committee had called for a status report on this within three months.  The Committee is, however, constrained to note that
it is already more than six months since the presentation of its report, but there is no indication of any noticeable progress. 
The Committee takes a serious view of this.  The Committee is of the firm view that it is high time that the matter is taken
up at the highest level, be it the Ministry of Defence or any State Government.
The Committee observes that land is to be provided in respect of total 126 KVs.  38 KVs pointed out by the
Committee were the longest pending ones.  The Committee is of the view that with the relaxation in  land norms for
different areas, sponsoring agencies for KVs should be in a better position to provide the land.  The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that sponsoring agencies for all such KVs should be pursued vigorously for release of land in a
time-bound manner.
 
Recommendations/Observations
2.3       Besides the provision of land, the other basic criteria for opening a new KV is the availability of 200 children (500
in big cities) and minimum concentration of 1000 Central Government employees. In all the cases, proposal has to
emanate from State Government/Departments/Ministries/Defence authorities/PSUs.  Committee’s attention has been
drawn towards the opening of 98 KVs in a short span of two  years, i.e. during 2003-2004 and 2004-2005.  On a specific
query in this regard, the Committee was informed that only three KVs - two in the project sector and another one in Tehran
were opened on specific requests/proposals.  As regards the remaining 95, the Committee noticed a very disturbing aspect. 
In the normal course, demands for opening of a new KVs come from various sources, ranging from the elected
representatives to the State/project authorities.   However, the Committee was informed that these 95 KVs were opened
without there being a formal proposal from the KV Sangathan. These KVs were opened on communications received from
the then Chairman, KV Sangathan at different points of time. Opening of these KVs was apparently justified by the
availability of surplus teachers and need for utilizing their services.  The Committee was given to understand that ex-post
facto approval was proposed to be obtained from the Cabinet after the matter was discussed and approved in EFC
meeting.  That could, however, not be done.
 
Recommendations/Observations
2.4       The Committee takes a serious view of this development because the prescribed pre-sanction procedure for the
purpose was simply given a go by in these cases.  The Committee is perturbed to note that these 95 KVs were opened
without taking any prior approval/sanction.   Even the ex-post facto approval could not be taken.   The committee is not
happy with such an approach of short circuiting the established procedures.  In this case, in the absence of any formal
approval and their being no fund allocation specifically for these KVs plan funds are utilised to fulfill the salary and other
requirements of staff members, of these KVs.  This is not a healthy fiscal practice.
 
Action Taken
(Para 2.3&2.4)
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs in its meeting held on 16.6.2006 has accorded ex-post facto approval
for opening of 95 Kendriya Vidyalayas opened during the years 2003-04 and 2004-05.Henceforth, it will be ensured by
KVS that orders for opening of new K.Vs are being issued only after obtaining necessary approval of Cabinet Committee
on Economic Affairs.
 
Comments of the Committee
(para 2.3 & 2.4)
The Committee in its 162
nd  Report presented on the 28th April, 2005 had commented upon the opening of 95 KVs
(64 in 2003-04 and 31 in 2004-05) in violation of norms, without sanction either by the Government or the Executive

197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
Committee of KVS.  The Committee was then given to understand that Government was contemplating to seek the
approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for continuation of these 95 KVs.  The Committee is
surprised to see that it took  more than a year for getting a formal approval of CCEA on the 16th June, 2006.  The
Committee hopes that the Department would abide by the assurance of opening of new KVs  henceforth only after
obtaining the necessary approval from CCEA.
 
Recommendations/Observations
2.5       The Committee is of the view that the role of the Government should be to ensure that prescribed norms for
opening of new KVs were strictly adhered to.  Instead of giving priority to such districts where KVs are genuinely required
and where there are no KVs, setting up such schools arbitrarily is certainly deplorable.
 
Action Taken
Recently after the approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs, orders for opening of 50 new KVs have
been issued in such Districts, which fall under the criteria of Special Focus Districts having no KV.
 
Comments of the Committee    
The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by the Department for opening of 50 new Kendriya Vidyalayas in
special Focus Districts having no KVs.  The Committee would, however, like to impress upon the Department to play a
pro-active role in making these 50 new KVs functional at the earliest.
 
Recommendations/Observations
2.6       As per the information made available to the Committee, out of such 95 KVs, 13 KVs are yet to be functional. The
Committee finds that the status of remaining 82 KVs cannot be considered as fully functional. The Committee fails to
understand the basis of there being surplus teachers and their adjustment in these 95 KVs. Details given by the Department
indicate that out of 36 sanctioned posts of PGT, only 29 were in position; and there were 55 vacancies in the sanctioned
posts of TGT. What is more disturbing is that, only 5 KVs had PGTs.  On a specific query in this regard, the Committee
was informed that rationale of surplus teachers was based on sanctioned posts.  However, in view of the fact that number
of posts filled up being less than the sanctioned posts, the Committee finds this justification untenable.   The Committee
views it with serious concern and deplores such adhocism.
 
Action Taken
At present out of 95 KVs opened during 2003-04 and 2004-05, 86 KVs are functional. One reason for surplus of
teachers is withdrawal of some sections in some vidyalayas. Besides the work load of teachers has also changed.Only 6
KVs are having PGTs because PGT post is sanctioned for the schools having XIth and XIIth class. Remaining KVs are
running either upto Xth class or below Xth standard.In order to fill up vacant posts of various categories of teachers in
Kendriya Vidyalayas, it is stated that in the year, 2005 Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan appointed 1564 teachers
(PGT/TGT/PRT) through direct recruitment and 464 teachers (PGT/TGT) through promotion.    In the year 2006, 747
teachers (PGT/TGT/PRT) were appointed through direct recruitment and 573 teachers (PGT/TGT) were promoted.   All
efforts are being made to post teachers against vacant posts.  Further the recruitment process for filling up of vacant
teaching posts for the year 2007 is in progress.In addition to this, the Vidyalaya Management Committee(VMC) of KVs
have been authorized to fill the vacant posts by engaging contract teachers from panel made for academic year.
 
Comments of the Committee    
Committee has been monitoring the status of 95 KVs opened during 2003-04 and 2004-05 (64 in 2003-04 and 31 in
2004-05).  The Committee was informed earlier that out of these 95 KVs, 13 KVs could not be made functional due to
non-provision of required infrastructure facilities by the concerned District Administration.   As per the latest status note
furnished by the Department, eleven KVs continue to be non-functional.   The Committee is not happy with this state of
affairs.  Duly sanctioned KVs remaining non-functional for want of infrastructure/ facilities for two-three years is a cause
of serious concern for the Committee.   The Committee strongly feels that the Department should take up this matter with
the concerned authorities and take a final decision.  The Committee is disturbed to note that the KV at Indira Point,
Campbell Bay, A & N Island could not be made functional and in its place KV Mungaoli (MP) has been opened during
2005-06 by utilizing the sanction of Indira Point KV.  The Committee fails to understand the rationale for such a step.
 
Recommendations/Observations
2.7       Details about schools made available to the Committee clearly indicate that enrolment status in some of the
Vidyalayas was far from satisfactory.   The Committee would like to emphasize that the Department ought to have been

197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
more concerned about the present status of these schools; availability of required teachers and infrastructure; and also
about the number of students enrolled.  It recommends that the remedial steps be taken urgently to remove all the
shortcomings.  The Committee emphasizes the need to review these cases expeditiously.   In some cases even there is no
land allotted to the school; how the construction work will start.  The Committee hopes that the Department must be
making efforts on their own in this regard.  The Committee would like the Department to take up the matter at the highest
level to sort out the problem and submit a report to it within three months.
Action Taken
The present status of enrolment in 86 functional KVs are at Annexure-II. Efforts are continuously being made to
obtain land from sponsoring authorities for construction of permanent buildings. Other infrastructure is being provided in
temporary buildings. KVS has also made effort to fill up vacancies of teachers to the extent possible.
 
Comments of the Committee    
Committee's attention has been drawn by the increase in the student intake of these 84 functional KVs.  As
compared to earlier enrolment figures of 25,989 students, the latest details given to the Committee indicate that there are
34,720 students now.  The Committee hopes that with the recruitment/appointment of a large number of Teachers in
different grades during 2005 and 2006, all the new functional KVs would be having the required teachers and
infrastructure support.  The Committee notes that only 6 KVs are having XIth and XIIth class and the remaining KVs are
running either upto Xth class or below Xth class.  The Committee feels that with a large number of students completing
Xth class, a need would arise for adjusting them in XIth class.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department should take up with concerned authorities for provision of required infrastructure, wherever feasible.   The
Committee is not aware whether land has been made available in respect of any of these KVs by the sponsoring
authorities.  Every effort needs to be made to expedite the process of land procurement so as to provide all the required
facilities to students of these KVs on a permanent basis.
 
 
III.       PROJECT VIDYALAYAS
Recommendations/Observations
3.1       Committee’s attention was drawn towards the closure of a large number of project Vidyalayas due to failure of the
sponsoring agencies in providing the required funds.  The Committee reiterates that the Department and KVS should
approach the project authorities for re-opening of closed Vidyalayas.   Those Project Vidyalayas which could not be
revived may be taken over by the Government and run as normal KVs.
 
Action Taken
Budgetary allocations are given to KVS by the Ministry to manage the affairs of KVs which are opened with its
approval in the civil/defence sector. KVS is not given any funds from the Government to run Project Sector Vidyalayas.
Hence, the Project Authorities are expected to make available the required funds to re-open the KVs under Project Sector.
 
Comments of the Committee    
The Committee feels that the Department has not given much thought on the recommendations of the Committee
that those project vidyalayas which could not be revived may be taken over by the Government and run as normal
Kendriya Vidyalayas.  The Committee reiterates that the Department should approach the project authorities for reopening
of closed Vidyalayas.  At the sametime, wherever feasible, the Department should explore the possibility of taking over
those closed KVs which cannot be revived.  Basic idea behind this observation of the Committee was to make optimum
and judicious utilization of existing infrastructure/ facilities at these closed project Vidyalayas for the ultimate benefit of
our students.    
 
Recommendations/Observations
3.2       The Committee notes that there are 129 project sector KVs functioning at present. Outstanding dues amounting to
Rs.16.08 crore are to be paid by the sponsoring agencies. These dues may be against both closed as well as running project
sector vidyalayas. The Committee understands that the Ministry is pursuing with the concerned agencies for payment of
dues/pending against them. However, these efforts seems to have failed, as only three PSUs have responded and these too
have expressed their inability in liquidating their dues. The Committee finds the situation quite discouraging. The
Committee is of the view that this matter needs to be taken up at the highest level. There is also a need for evolving a
mechanism for release of funds by project authorities in advance on yearly/half yearly basis. Only then, this problem is
likely to be solved, otherwise, this financial burden on KV Sangathan could continue to persist or may even increase.
 

197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
 
Action Taken
The views of the Committee has been noted for compliance. In the meantime as a result of the correspondence, the
Sangathan has received a proposal for liquidation of outstanding dues of Rs.1,03,67,895.00 (Actual dues
Rs.1,28,28,177.00) from Hindustan Copper Limited(HCL) in 10 equal installments (Annexure-III) The Sangathan has
already accepted the offer and requested HCL to liquidate the total outstanding dues. (Annexure-IV).        The matter
regarding recovery of outstanding dues both in respect of closed Vidyalayas as well as functional Vidyalayas was
deliberated in the Finance Committee   Meeting held on 13.11.2006. The Finance Committee recommended that   fresh
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) may be signed with the sponsoring project authorities clearly spelling out the
terms & conditions  governing the Project Vidyalayas which should be for a specific period and which may be renewed
subject to satisfactory compliance of the terms & conditions of MOU. It was also recommended by the Committee that
while entering into new MOU, a provision for maintenance of ‘Escrow Account’ might be explored so as to ensure timely
release of funds for running of Project Vidyalayas (Annexure-V).              The suggestions have been approved by the
Board of Governors in its meeting held on 4.12.2006 (Annexure-VI).
 
Comments of the Committee    
The Committee notes the efforts made by the Department to get the outstanding dues recovered from HCL.  The
Committee also notes the Finance Committee's recommendation of signing fresh MoU with the sponsoring project
authorities clearly spelling out the terms and conditions and subsequent approval of the same by the Board of Governors. 
The Committee has however not been apprised about the actual steps taken by the Department for expediting the signing
of MoUs with different sponsoring authorities.  The Committee is also not aware about the status of outstanding dues from
the other sponsoring authorities.   The Committee would like to be apprised in this regard. The Committee also
recommends that the concerned Ministry/Department under whose jurisdiction the PSU is working should also be made a
party in the MoU.
 
IV.       KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA BUILDINGS
Recommendations/Observations
4.1       The Committee has made detailed observations in its earlier reports on the abnormal delay in the construction of
KV buildings. The Committee has asked for a status report on the constructions indicating the year when projects were
cleared, funds allocated, and when the construction started; reasons for delay as also the revised estimate. The Committee
found that 38 KVs were yet to be allotted land; construction work was going on in 65 KVs and in 28 KVs, school
buildings were at the planning stage. A close scrutiny of the ongoing construction works in 65 KVs revealed that 11
different construction agencies were involved in constructing KV Building, with CPWD having the largest number of 24
projects. These included KVs sanctioned from January 2002 to December 2005. In as many as 40 KVs, work was either at
the planning stage or progress was very slow due to one reason or the other. Situation in this regard was really bad in the
N.E. Region. Out of the 14 KVs buildings under construction in this region, status of the following projects is self
revealing:-
 
 State Adminis-
trative
Sanction
(Rs. in lakhs)
Date of
Sanction
Construction
Agency
Physical
progress
Reason for delay
1. Kokrajhar
(Assam)
361.00 23.7.2002 CPWD 05% Work delay due to change of site
after finalisation of tender by
CPWD, retendering in progress
2. BSF Panbari
(Assam)
243.00 25.3.2003 CPWD 10% Work stopped since last year, no
reason given by CPWD
3. Kailashahar
(Tripura)
306.00 13.4.2004 CPWD  Land not suitable, work likely to
be cancelled.
 
4.2       The Committee is concerned about the position in this regard in the NE Region and feels that special efforts should
be made to complete all the projects in a fixed time period.
 
Action Taken
The KVs under construction as on 31.12.2006 is 37. 
32 school buildings of KVs were completed during the period since the last Committee meeting due to close monitoring

197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
Chairman VMC President
Representatives from local construction agency like CPWD, PWD, MES etc.
other than Construction Agency.
 
2 Members
Representatives from Civil Engineering department of local Engineering
college/Poly Technic.
 
1 Member
Member from VMC 1 Member
PTA representatives (preferably with engineering background) 2 Members
EE/PM of the construction agency in the Vidyalaya 1 Member
Teachers (to be nominated by Principal) 2 Members
Principal Member Secretary
projects at various levels.
The details are given below:
-No. of School building works reported            -              65
Building Completed                                          -           (-)32
Project Cancelled due to land problems            -           (-)02                                        31Newly sanctioned                
                        -           (+)06      
Total as on 31.12.2006                                    -               37
The present status of school buildings in NE Region is at Annexure-VII. To complete sanctioned projects of school
buildings and staff quarters etc. in NER, regular meeting for these works are being done at various levels viz. through
Monitoring Committee at Vidyalaya level, Regional Offices level, monthly Review meeting by Commissioner, KVS, at
KVS HQ level besides meeting with concerned Chief Engineer of respective agency. To complete the sanctioned work in
stipulated time frame, Commissioner, KVS regularly holds meeting with Director General (Works), CPWD.
 
Comments of the Committee
(para 4.1& 4.2)
Committee has been informed that to complete the sanctioned projects of school buildings and staff quarters in
NER, regular meetings are being held at various levels, ie. Monitoring Committee at Vidyalaya level, Regional office
level, monthly review meeting by the Commissioner, KVS at headquarters and also meeting with the concerned Chief
Engineer and also Director-General (Works), CPWD.  However, progress made in the construction of 9 KVs in NER (6 in
Assam, 1 in Mizoram and 2 in Tripura) reveals a very dismal scenario.  It seems that meetings/interactions at different
level with different agencies have not had any impact.   In the case of the KVs sanctioned during  2002-2005, construction
work upto 50% has been completed so far.  There are cases where tendering process is being unduly delayed.   The
Committee would, therefore, like to emphasise that the Department should pursue with all concerned authorities for
expediting these over-due projects.  The defaulting authorities also need to be made accountable.         
 
Recommendations/Observations
4.7       Committee’s attention was also drawn towards another problem being faced by CPWD with regard to time taken in
handing over of works by CPWD to KV authorities, which varied from state to state. The Committee is of the view that
there is an urgent need for a complete review of existing procedure at every stage---pre-construction, construction and
post-construction of KV buildings. Although some initiative has been taken by KVS and CPWD, the Committee feels that
this would not serve the purpose. The Committee, therefore, would like to emphasize that all unnecessary procedural
formalities need to be done away with urgently. A regular and effective monitoring mechanism involving all the concerned
authorities, the Committee feels needs to be put in place urgently. The Committee would like to impress upon KV
Sangathan, CPWD and other construction agencies to complete all the pending construction works in a pre-approved fixed
schedule so that there is no further cost escalation as also there was no inconvenience caused to the students and teachers.
 
Action Taken
K.V.S. has constituted a Monitoring Committee at Vidyalaya level to monitor the construction works at regular
intervals. The committee consists of the following members:-
 
 
 
Apart from above, the progress of all construction works is reviewed in the meeting convened with Head of
construction agency and in works committee meeting of KVS from time to time in order to complete the works in time.
 

197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
Comments of the Committee    
The Committee welcomes the constitution of a Monitoring Committee at Vidyalaya level to monitor the
construction work at regular intervals.  However, the Committee emphasizes that these Monitoring Committees should be
fully activated to work as effective agencies for expediting all the constructions works.
 
 V.       ADMISSION CRITERIA FOR STUDENTS
Recommendations/Observations
5.1       The Committee notes that the present admission policy results in overcrowding of certain KVs in different parts of
the country and it therefore, feels that this problem needs to be tackled without any further delay. In this regard,
Committee’s attention has been drawn by the Report of the Baldev Mahajan Committee given in 2000. One of the main
recommendations of the Mahajan Committee, the Committee as informed was that freezing of sections was neither
academically sound nor administratively feasible. The Committee is also of the view that problem of increasing number of
students cannot be solved by the freezing of sections. The Committee was also informed that the Board of Governors of
KV Sangathan was in agreement with the recommendation of the Baldev Mahajan Committee that the Commissioner,
KVS should have full powers of opening of new sections and sanctioning additional staff. The Board of Governors had,
accordingly, decided to recommend the same to the Government. The Committee, however, finds that as per the latest
response received from the Department, the recommendations of the Baldev Mahajan Committee have since been rejected
in principle. The Committee fails to comprehend the reasons for the change in the stand of the Government. The
Committee would like to point out that number of students in a class/section being more than the prescribed ratio, does
affect the quality of education adversely; it needs to be avoided. The Committee is also in favour of more and more
students getting admitted to the KVs. But overcrowding is certainly not conducive for focused attention on students’
performance. KVs cannot be an exception to this. The Committee, therefore, feels that all efforts need to be made to avoid
overcrowding in KVs by opening additional sections with all the infrastructure wherever needed.
 
Action Taken
Kendriya Vidyalayas primarily provide education to the wards of the transferable Central Govt. employees. These
employees get transferred to various metropolis and Kendriya Vidyalayas located in these cities/ state capitals have to
accommodate the children producing Transfer Certificate from another Kendriya Vidyalaya. One of the reasons of
overcrowding in KVs located in cities/state capitals is due to this factor. Use of special dispensation quota and demand
from Government employees for some centrally located KVs has put additional pressure. However, to ease the situation
new sections have been sanctioned in most of the KVs where infrastructure is available. To accommodate more students,
KVS has already started running of two shifts in 44 Kendriya Vidyalayas. In these KVs the problem of overcrowding has
eased to a certain extent. However, sections cannot be opened indiscriminately due to constraint of land and building
space. Within the capacity of the infrastructure, new sections are opened by KVS depending on need.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee has been expressing its concern about certain problems faced in implementing the discretionary
quota for the Members of Parliament for admission in the Kendriya Vidyalayas.  One such problem relates to those
Members of the Lok Sabha who do not have Kendriya Vidyalaya in their constituencies.   As per the existing system, they,
of course, get the prescribed coupons but cannot recommend any admission under this quota.  It, thus, amounts to denying
this facility to such MPs.  The Committee, therefore, feels that this lacunae needs to be corrected immediately by allowing
MPs under this category either to recommend admission in a school situated in the neighbouring  constituencies or
anywhere in their State, as is the case with the Members of the Rajya Sabha.
VI.       VACANCY POSITION
Recommendations/Observations
6.1       In its 162
nd Report, the Committee had dealt with the problem of vacancies existing in different categories of
teaching staff in KVS.  The Committee found that the position remained very discouraging for a long time.   The
Committee notes that the selection of 1571 teachers in December 2003, in which certain procedural irregularities were
alleged to have been committed, continued to remain undecided till September 2006.  As a result, the appointment of the
teachers was withheld.   In the meantime, a Satyam Committee was appointed to look into the issues and the selected
teachers were given conditional appointment on ad hoc basis, till the Committee submitted its report.  Thus, the teachers
remained ad-hoc for more than three years.  In the meanwhile, the Committee learnt that the report of the Satyam
Committee has since been submitted to the Government.   The Committee notes with serious concern that the process of
selection of teachers that had started in February 2003, could not be completed till the time of the writing of this Report. 
The Committee is at a loss to see that 1571 posts of teachers continued to remain vacant for several years.  The
Committee, while appreciating the move for giving the ad hoc appointment to the selected teachers pending the inquiry,

197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
demands strict action against those found responsible for this fiasco.  The Committee calls upon the government to
consider the recommendations of the Satyam Committee for an early implementation so that future of those teachers is
decided without further delay.  The Committee is also aware that on an average about 7.5% adhoc teachers have
contractual appointment.  The Committee would like to point out that teachers appointed for a short period would have no
motivation to give good results, for obvious reasons.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that ad-hoc appointment
should be to the barest minimum and the vacancies must be filled as soon as possible.  The Committee also has serious
reservations about the prolonged recruitment procedure that goes on for years.  There is an urgent need for having a review
of the same for streamlining, decentralizing and eliminating the unnecessary procedural formalities.
 
Action Taken
Candidates, who had been selected for the post of PGT/TGT/PRT during 2003, were given provisional offer of
appointment on contract basis initially.   Later on these appointments were regularized in September, 2006 after
considering the findings of the Sathyam Committee.
KVS is in the process of another round of recruitment of teachers and the process is likely to be over by end of
September, 2007.
It is the policy of KVS to have the minimum possible number of  contractual teachers and that too mostly in cases
of unanticipated vacancies.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations
6.2       The Committee in its 162
nd Report had strongly advocated the need for having a decentralized – zone wise
recruitment for KV teachers, instead of the existing centralized procedure. The most obvious reason for having a
decentralization system is to avoid the inherent problems faced in a centralized recruitment system by the KVS and the
candidates coming from different part of such a vast country.  The Committee is of the firm view that centralized
recruitment system is of the main reasons for continuance of vacancies for long time affecting the academic environment
of the Vidyalayas.  The Committee therefore, reiterates its recommendations of decentralization of the recruitment process
for selection of candidates at zonal level so that it becomes convenient to people of different regions to participate in the
process which otherwise may not be possible for them.   It would also ensure proper representation of the candidates from
different parts of the country, particularly from NE States and J&K.
 
Action Taken
Prior to 1999 the direct recruitments to the teaching posts used to be made by short-listing the candidates on the
basis of pre-determined evaluation criteria taking into consideration the academic and professional achievements and co-
curricular activities followed by interviews.  Direct recruitment for the post of PRT, TGT and Misc. categories of teachers
was done at the regional level by constituting Selection Board.  Promotions to the aforesaid posts from feeder grades/ posts
used to be done centrally at the Hqrs.  The appointment of selected candidates was also done within the region.  The
promotions as well as appointment by direct recruitment of PGTs, Vice-principals and Principals were made centrally at
the HQ. level.  In this system while the candidates from the universities that give liberal marks used to get included in the
short-lists, while the relatively better candidates from the universities who do not give liberal marks could not make to the
lists.  In order to remove such disparities, it was decided on the recommendations of the Selja Committee to hold the
written examination to assess the real potential and capabilities of the candidates irrespective of the university or
institution from which they were coming.  Need was felt for centralization in the recruitment process in order to ensure
greater degree of objectivity, transparency, uniformity in standards and selection of teachers on the basis of proven merit
as independently assessed on a uniform and standard criteria. It was, therefore, decided to centralize the recruitment of all
teaching and non-teaching posts except Group ‘D’.   In the new system, all candidates who possess the requisite
qualifications prescribed for the post are required to take written examination and based on merit list, drawn on the basis of
their performance in written test & interviews, select panels are prepared.   The matter on decentralization of recruitments
was sent to Legal Adviser of KVS for his opinion.   He opined that the regional recruitment system if followed would lead
to innumerable litigations, as KVS cannot shut out outsiders from applying for any post.  It has been the experience of
KVS in the past that regional recruitment led to a lot of complications resulting in switching over to centralized
recruitment system. In KVS, posts are filled up on transfer also and if regional recruitment is resorted to and if posts are
filled up on transfer, disgruntled    persons approach the courts questioning the manner of filling up of posts.  Courts do
quash such filling up of posts by transfer.       So far as the representations of the candidates from different parts of the
country particularly from NE states and J&K are concerned, it is submitted that the advertisement for recruitment of
teachers is published in the Employment News (Weekly), National News papers and also in the local/vernacular News
Papers. Besides this each and every information relating to recruitment is uploaded on the website of KVS.  The

197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
publication and displaying on notice boards of the Regional Offices as well as in the Schools is also taken at length for
wide publicity in each and every corner of the country.  As such all-eligible candidates from any part of the country can
apply in response to Sangathan’s advertisement.  In fact teachers working in the Kendriya Vidyalayas belong to all parts of
the country.
 
Comments of the Committee
(Para 6.1 & 6.2)
The Committee does not agree with the arguments given by the Department against decentralization of recruitment
by Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan; it appears to be purely technical without appreciating the Committee’s concern.  The
Committee therefore, reiterates its recommendations for making decentralized recruitment in Kendriya Vidyalayas.  Steps
must be taken for removing the legal hurdles by framing suitable laws and regulations.
 
VII.      GRIEVANCES REDRESSAL
Recommendations/Observations
7.1       The Committee observes that some initiative has been taken by the KV Sangathan for strengthening the Grievance
Redressal Machinery.  Senior officers are visiting Regional Offices to attend to the grievances of employees.   Every day,
specific hours have been fixed at the KV Sangathan’s Headquarters when aggrieved employees can meet the concerned
officers including the Commissioner without prior appointment.  While appreciating the initiative taken by KV Sangathan,
the  Committee would like to point out that there should also be a mechanism whereby a track of efficacy of such an outlet
available to employees can be constantly monitored. The Committee feels that the ground reality in this regard seem to be
somewhat different.  Even public representatives such as MPs sometimes, fail to contact the concerned officers because
most of the time they are not available.  Details regarding number of Grievances received and those dealt with also do not
indicate a significant improvement. The Committee has learnt that teachers union in KVS has been de-recognised.   The
Committee would like to have a brief note on the issue for its consideration.
 
Action Taken
KVS has already implemented a Grievance Redressal Mechanism as formulated by Govt. of India.Besides above
visitors are attended to daily from 4.00 p.m. to 5.00 p.m. by all senior officers of KVS, HQ and Regional Offices without
prior appointment for redressal of their grievances. The Hon’ble representatives of the public are also attended to as and
when they visit the office and during meetings they are extended due courtesy.The brief note on status of teachers union is
given in Annexure-VIII.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is not convinced with the Grievances redressal mechanism working in KVS, since there are no
details about the complaints received/ pending / redressal made during the last years. Without any supporting data, the
Committee is not able to judge the efficacy of the mechanism. 
 
VIII.     SURVEY OF KVs
Recommendations/Observations
8.1       The Committee is of the firm view that this is the right time for making a comprehensive assessment of KVs spread
over different parts of the country. Reason behind making such a suggestion is that Kendriya Vidyalayas having evolved
into a reputed educational system since its inception in 1960s have seen many ups and downs. In spite of the best efforts
put forth by all concerned, quite a few constraints continue to persist at the ground level. Committee’s specific
recommendation for conducting a detailed survey was meant to take corrective measures based on its findings so that KV
Sangathan is better equipped in attaining its goals. Committees recommendations /observations on the various aspects of
functioning of KVS are also meant for this purpose only.
 
Action Taken
An evaluation of KVS was conducted by a Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri J.C. Pant, former Secretary
to Government of India in 2002. Need for another evaluation will be assessed by the Ministry.  Recommendations of the
Working Group on Secondary and Vocational Education constituted by the Planning Commission for the Eleventh Plan
will also be kept in view.
 
Recommendations/Observations
8.2       The Committee is unhappy to note that the spirit of Committee’s suggestions have not been given the importance
that they deserved by the Department/KV Sangathan. The Committee is afraid that development of an Information Booklet

197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
and periodical submission of duly    filled–up Proforma by KVs would remain a routine exercise. The Committee would
again reiterate its recommendation for conducting a nation – wide survey of KVs and the information generated there from
for improving the functioning of KV Sangathan.
 
Action Taken
The Ministry and KVS attach the highest importance to the Committee’s recommendations and have been
benefited from many of their suggestions. The suggestion for the survey will be given due consideration.
 
Comments of the Committee
(para 8.1 & 8.2)
The Committee has been informed that an evaluation of KVs was conducted by a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Shri J.C. Pant, former Secretary to Government of India in 2002.  The Committee is not aware about the
mandate and area of evaluation of the Pant Committee.   A copy of the report of this Committee has also not been made
available to the Committee.  Against this backdrop, the stand taken by the Department that need for another evaluation of
KVs will be assessed by them is not acceptable to the Committee.   The Committee would also like to point out that
evaluation and survey are two different aspects.  The Committee therefore recommends that detailed survey of KVs as per
Committee's recommendation should be undertaken and completed at the earliest.
*****
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION AT A GLANCE
 
II.         NORMS FOR OPENING OF KENDRIYA VIDYALAYAS
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee had identified 38 Kendriya Vidyalayas where land had not been made available by the sponsoring
agencies even after a lapse of 20-25 years in some cases.  The latest status report in respect of these 38 Kendriya
Vidyalayas reveals that position remains unchanged.  Correspondence/meetings at different levels with all concerned have
not yielded any desired results.  The Committee observes that in most of the cases although land had been finally
earmarked by the sponsors, approval of the Ministry of  Defence / concerned State Government was awaited. The
Committee had called for a status report on this within three months.  The Committee is, however, constrained to note that
it is already more than six months since the presentation of its report, but there is no indication of any noticeable progress. 
The Committee takes a serious view of this.  The Committee is of the firm view that it is high time that the matter is taken
up at the highest level, be it the Ministry of Defence or any State Government.
The Committee observes that land is to be provided in respect of total 126 KVs.  38 KVs pointed out by the
Committee were the longest pending ones.  The Committee is of the view that with the relaxation in  land norms for
different areas, sponsoring agencies for KVs should be in a better position to provide the land.  The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that sponsoring agencies for all such KVs should be pursued vigorously for release of land in a
time-bound manner.
(Para 2.2)
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee in its 162
nd  Report presented on the 28th April, 2005 had commented upon the opening of 95 KVs
(64 in 2003-04 and 31 in 2004-05) in violation of norms, without sanction either by the Government or the Executive
Committee of KVS.  The Committee was then given to understand that Government was contemplating to seek the
approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for continuation of these 95 KVs.  The Committee is
surprised to see that it took  more than a year for getting a formal approval of CCEA on the 16th June, 2006.  The
Committee hopes that the Department would abide by the assurance of opening of new KVs  henceforth only after
obtaining the necessary approval from CCEA.                                                                         (Para 2.3 & 2.4)
           
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by the Department for opening of 50 new Kendriya Vidyalayas in
special Focus Districts having no KVs.  The Committee would, however, like to impress upon the Department to play a
pro-active role in making these 50 new KVs functional at the earliest.               (Para 2.5)
 

197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
Comments of the Committee
 
Committee has been monitoring the status of 95 KVs opened during 2003-04 and 2004-05 (64 in 2003-04 and 31 in
2004-05).  The Committee was informed earlier that out of these 95 KVs, 13 KVs could not be made functional due to
non-provision of required infrastructure facilities by the concerned District Administration.   As per the latest status note
furnished by the Department, eleven KVs continue to be non-functional.   The Committee is not happy with this state of
affairs.  Duly sanctioned KVs remaining non-functional for want of infrastructure/ facilities for two-three years is a cause
of serious concern for the Committee.   The Committee strongly feels that the Department should take up this matter with
the concerned authorities and take a final decision.  The Committee is disturbed to note that the KV at Indira Point,
Campbell Bay, A & N Island could not be made functional and in its place KV Mungaoli (MP) has been opened during
2005-06 by utilizing the sanction of Indira Point KV.  The Committee fails to understand the rationale for such a
step.                                                                                      (Para 2.6)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Committee's attention has been drawn by the increase in the student intake of these 84 functional KVs.  As
compared to earlier enrolment figures of 25,989 students, the latest details given to the Committee indicate that there are
34,720 students now.  The Committee hopes that with the recruitment/appointment of a large number of Teachers in
different grades during 2005 and 2006, all the new functional KVs would be having the required teachers and
infrastructure support.  The Committee notes that only 6 KVs are having XIth and XIIth class and the remaining KVs are
running either upto Xth class or below Xth class.  The Committee feels that with a large number of students completing
Xth class, a need would arise for adjusting them in XIth class.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department should take up with concerned authorities for provision of required infrastructure, wherever feasible.  The
Committee is not aware whether land has been made available in respect of any of these KVs by the sponsoring
authorities.  Every effort needs to be made to expedite the process of land procurement so as to provide all the required
facilities to students of these KVs on a permanent basis.                                                                            (Para 2.7)
 
III.       PROJECT VIDYALAYAS     
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee feels that the Department has not given much thought on the recommendations of the Committee
that those project vidyalayas which could not be revived may be taken over by the Government and run as normal
Kendriya Vidyalayas.  The Committee reiterates that the Department should approach the project authorities for reopening
of closed Vidyalayas.  At the sametime, wherever feasible, the Department should explore the possibility of taking over
those closed KVs which cannot be revived.  Basic idea behind this observation of the Committee was to make optimum
and judicious utilization of existing infrastructure/ facilities at these closed project Vidyalayas for the ultimate benefit of
our students.
(Para 3.1)
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee notes the efforts made by the Department to get the outstanding dues recovered from HCL.  The
Committee also notes the Finance Committee's recommendation of signing fresh MoU with the sponsoring project
authorities clearly spelling out the terms and conditions and subsequent approval of the same by the Board of Governors. 
The Committee has however not been apprised about the actual steps taken by the Department for expediting the signing
of MoUs with different sponsoring authorities.  The Committee is also not aware about the status of outstanding dues from
the other sponsoring authorities.   The Committee would like to be apprised in this regard. The Committee also
recommends that the concerned Ministry/Department under whose jurisdiction the PSU is working should also be made a
party in the MoU.                  (Para 3.2)
 
IV.       KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA BUILDINGS
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Committee has been informed that to complete the sanctioned projects of school buildings and staff quarters in
NER, regular meetings are being held at various levels, ie. Monitoring Committee at Vidyalaya level, Regional office

197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
level, monthly review meeting by the Commissioner, KVS at headquarters and also meeting with the concerned Chief
Engineer and also Director-General (Works), CPWD.  However, progress made in the construction of 9 KVs in NER (6 in
Assam, 1 in Mizoram and 2 in Tripura) reveals a very dismal scenario.  It seems that meetings/interactions at different
level with different agencies have not had any impact.   In the case of the KVs sanctioned during  2002-2005, construction
work upto 50% has been completed so far.  There are cases where tendering process is being unduly delayed.   The
Committee would, therefore, like to emphasise that the Department should pursue with all concerned authorities for
expediting these over-due projects.  The defaulting authorities also need to be made accountable.  
                                                                                                                                          (para 4.1& 4.2)
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee welcomes the constitution of a Monitoring Committee at Vidyalaya level to monitor the
construction work at regular intervals.  However, the Committee emphasizes that these Monitoring Committees should be
fully activated to work as effective agencies for expediting all the constructions works.      (Para 4.7)
 
 
 
V.    ADMISSION CRITERIA FOR STUDENTS
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee has been expressing its concern about certain problems faced in implementing the discretionary
quota for the Members of Parliament for admission in the Kendriya Vidyalayas.  One such problem relates to those
Members of the Lok Sabha who do not have Kendriya Vidyalaya in their constituencies.   As per the existing system, they,
of course, get the prescribed coupons but cannot recommend any admission under this quota.  It, thus, amounts to denying
this facility to such MPs.  The Committee, therefore, feels that this lacunae needs to be corrected immediately by allowing
MPs under this category either to recommend admission in a school situated in the neighbouring  constituencies or
anywhere in their State, as is the case with the Members of the Rajya Sabha.       (Para 5.1)
 
VI.   VACANCY POSITION
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee does not agree with the arguments given by the Department against decentralization of recruitment
by Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan; it appears to be purely technical without appreciating the Committee’s concern.  The
Committee therefore, reiterates its recommendations for making decentralized recruitment in Kendriya Vidyalayas.  Steps
must be taken for removing the legal hurdles by framing suitable laws and regulations.                               (Para 6.1 & 6.2)
 
VII.      GRIEVANCES REDRESSAL
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is not convinced with the Grievances redressal mechanism working in KVS, since there are no
details about the complaints received/ pending / redressal made during the last years. Without any supporting data, the
Committee is not able to judge the efficacy of the mechanism.                                            (Para 7.1)
 
VIII.     SURVEY OF KVs
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee has been informed that an evaluation of KVs was conducted by a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Shri J.C. Pant, former Secretary to Government of India in 2002.  The Committee is not aware about the
mandate and area of evaluation of the Pant Committee.   A copy of the report of this Committee has also not been made
available to the Committee.  Against this backdrop, the stand taken by the Department that need for another evaluation of
KVs will be assessed by them is not acceptable to the Committee.   The Committee would also like to point out that
evaluation and survey are two different aspects.  The Committee therefore recommends that detailed survey of KVs as per
Committee's recommendation should be undertaken and completed at the earliest.                             (para 8.1 & 8.2)

197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
MINUTES
XIX
NINETEETH MEETING
               
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 17 th July, 2007 in Committee
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Janardan Dwivedi              ¾                    Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
5. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
6. Smt. Brinda Karat
7. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
8. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
9. Smt. Supriya Sule
 
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Ashok Argal
11. Shri Basudeb Barman
12. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
13. Shri Harisinh Chavda
14. Shri Ramswaroop Koli
15. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
16. Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
17. Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
18. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
19. Dr. Thokchom Meinya
20. Shri K. Virupakshappa
21. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
22. Shri Francis K. George
23. Shri Anantkumar Hegde
24. Shri Rahul Gandhi
25. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
26. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
 
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Deputy Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Smt. Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
 
2.
                  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. He informed the Members that the one
year term of the Committee is coming to an end on the 4 th August 2007.  He thanked the Members for their contribution
and cooperation for the successful functioning of the Committee.    The Members also thanked the Chairman of this
Committee for conducting the proceedings of the Committee effectively and smoothly.   The Committee also thanked the
officials of the Secretariat for assisting the Committee aptly and promptly and also for their efforts in preparing
comprehensive/detailed draft Reports.
 
3.
                  The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the following draft reports: (i) Action Taken Report on the
183rd Report of the Committee on Major Issues concerning Kendriya Vidyalayas ; (ii) *** (iii) *** The Committee

197thReport of Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/197threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
discussed and adopted the reports one-by–one with certain modifications. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to
fix a suitable date to present/lay the Reports and also nominate members from both the Houses to present/lay the reports.
 
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 p.m.
 
NEW DELHI
17
th July, 2007           
     VIMAL KUMAR
           DEPUTY DIRECTOR
 
_______________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matter