Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2015/Sravana, 1937 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
REPORT NO. 
270
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTIETH REPORT
Performance of National Sports Development Fund
and
Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons
(Part I)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th August, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th August, 2015)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTIETH REPORT
Performance of National Sports Development Fund
and
Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons
(Part I)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th August, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th August, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2015/Sravana, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)—(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—22
5. O BSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 23—28
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 29—36
7. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 37—40

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2014)
#1. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda — Chairman
*2. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
RAJYA SABHA
3. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury
4. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
5. Shri Anubhav Mohanty
6. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
7. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
8. Shri Basawaraj Patil
9. Shri Sharad Pawar
10. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa
11. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
12. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
13. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
14. Shri C.R. Chaudhary
15. Shrimati Bhawana Gawali
16. Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha
$17. Dr. Ramshankar Katheria
18. Prof. Chintamani Malviya
19. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
20. Shri Chand Nath
21. Shri Hari Om Pandey
22. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
23. Shri N.K. Premachandran
24. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
25. Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran
26. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
27. Shri M.I. Shanavas
28. Dr. Nepal Singh
29. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
30. Shri P.R. Sundaram
31. Shri Ajay Tamta
32. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
@33. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
# Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda was elevated to Minister of Health and Family Welfare on 9.11.2014.
* Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya nominated as a member and Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 26.11.2014.
$ Dr. Ramshankar Katheria was elevated to Minister of State, Human Resource Development on 9.11.2014.
@ Shri Anant Kumar Hegde nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.3.2015.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri R.B. Gupta, Joint Secretary
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and
Seventieth Report of the Committee on the ‘Performance of National Sports Development Fund and
Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons’- Part I.
2. The Committee visited the Sports Complex and Regional Centres of Sports Authority of
India at Kolkata, Bengaluru and Mumbai. The Committee held wide ranging discussions with a
number of outstanding and distinguished sportspersons including Padamshri, Arjuna and
Dronacharya awardees, coaches, representatives of  National/State-Level Federations/Associations.
The Committee also heard the views of representatives of SAI, UCO Bank, United Bank of India,
Allahabad Bank, Coal India Limited Damodar Valley Corporation, Central Bank of India, State Bank
of India, Union Bank of India, Bank of India, IDBI Bank, Bank of Maharashtra, Bank of Baroda,
Dena Bank and LIC, Indian Oil, BPCL, HPCL, Air India, BEML, BEL, HAL, Canara Bank, State
Bank of Mysore, Vijaya Bank, Syndicate Bank and Corporation Bank to have an idea about their
contribution to the National Sports Development Fund and to explore how they can promote sports
and recruitment of sportspersons.
3. The Committee also interacted with the Secretary, Department of Sports, Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Secretary, Department of Financial Services (DFS),
Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises, Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training and
Director General, Sports Authority of India (SAI) in its meeting held on the 17
th July, 2015.
4. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the subject and adopted the same in its
meeting held on the 10th August, 2015.
5. The list of witnesses heard by the Committee on the subject is attached in Annexure.
6. For facility of the reference, observations and recommendations of Committee have been
printed in bold letters at end of Report.
N
EW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA
August 10, 2015 Chairman,
Sravana 19,1937 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
AIFF : All India Football Federation
BCCI : Board of Control for Cricket in India
BHEL : Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd.
BOI : Bank of India
BPCL : Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
BSB : Banks’ Sports Control Board
CIL : Coal India Limited
CISPA : Coal India Sports Promotion Association
CPSE : Central Public Sector Enterprises
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
DoPT : Department of Personnel and Training
DVC : Damodar Valley Corporation
GoI : Government of India
HPCL : Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited
IBA : Indian Banks’ Association
lOB : Indian Overseas Bank
IOC : Indian Oil Corporation
ITC : Imperial Tobacco Company of India Ltd.
LIC : Life Insurance Corporation of India
MoF : Ministry of Finance
NSDF : National Sports Development Fund
ONGC : Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited
PSBs : Public Sector Banks
PSUs : Public Sector Undertakings
SAI : Sports Authority of India
SAIL : S teel Authority of India Limited
SBI : State Bank of India
SCB : Sports Control Board
TISCO : T ata Iron and Steel Company Limited
TOP : Target Olympic Podium
TTFI : T able-Tennis Federation of India
UBI : Union Bank of India
UCO : United Commercial Bank
(iv)

1
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
Sports and games are an integral component in the all round development of human
personality. Apart from being a means of entertainment and physical fitness, sports also played
a great role in generating the spirit of healthy competition and bonding within the community.
Although India has a large population, its achievements in international sports have not been
commensurate. Considering the fact that Indian population is one of the youngest population
in the world, India has an immense potential in developing into a powerhouse of sports.
Through its various sports promotional schemes/programmes, the Government, nurtures talent
in youth, and provides them with requisite infrastructure, equipments, coaching facilities and
competition exposure for overall development of sports. It is a known fact that excellence in
sports has a great bearing on national prestige and morale of the country. Thus Government
spending on sports is an important indicator of the promotion of sports. There is no denying
the fact that India is lagging far behind the other countries in achieving excellence in the
sports. One of the reasons for this state of affairs is lack of funding in the sports sector. The
Government of India and the State Governments together spend only around 3 paise per capita
per day on sports which highlights the low level of spending on sports. Worldwide sports
sector has a mix of private and public investment. In India it is largely a State funded activity.
As the next Olympic games are approaching, the focus is once again on sports, skill
augumentation, training, coaching, competition, state of art equipments and better support
services to the sportspersons.
2. In the light of this background, the Committee decided to discuss broadly the subject
‘Promotion of Sports’ during its visit to Kolkata, Mumbai and Bengaluru from 1st to 7th July,
2015. While discussing the promotion of sports, sports promotion policies and fund mobilization
for sports with the public sector banks/public sector undertakings the Committee discovered that
most of the Public Sector Banks and Public Sector Undertakings did not have any definite and
uniform sports promotion policy in the first place. Further, they were also unaware of the existence
of the National Sports Development Fund created by the Government of India to promote sports
in a sustained manner. The question of contributing to that fund as a social responsibility was not
of much importance to them. In view of this scenario, the Committee also decided to deliberate
upon the performance of National Sports Development Fund and interact with all the stakeholders
on the issue.
(I)
PERFORMANCE OF NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND
3. The Central Government had established the National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) in
1998 under the Charitable Endowment Act, 1890, with a view to mobilizing resources from the
Government as well as non-governmental sources, including the private/corporate sector and non-
resident Indians, for promotion of sports and games in the country. In order to make contributions
to the fund attractive, cent percent exemption from income tax was made available on all the
contributions to the National Sports Development Fund. Financial Assistance is given from NSDF
to the Following:

2
— to outstanding sportspersons, sports federations and other organizations;
— top level sports persons who are medal winning prospects in Olympics,
Commonwealth Games, Asian Games and other international competitions;
— assistance is given for customized training to sportspersons both in India and abroad
to prepare them for winning medals at international events;
— special support to the sportspersons who have been selected under the programme
TOP (Target Olympic Podium), a Scheme, specifically devised to train medal prospects
for Olympic 2016 and 2020; and
— financial assistance is given to reputed organizations/institutes, engaged in the
promotion of sports and games for specific projects like creation of infrastructure,
procurement of state of art equipment etc.
4. It will not be out of place to mention here that in 1995 the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development in its 34
th Report on “India’s Performance
in International Sports” had recommended as under:-
“The Committee feels that the Government alone cannot deliver the goods. Public and
Private Sectors’ involvement is necessary in supplementing the governmental efforts. The
Committee, therefore, emphasizes the need for a joint and coordinated approach by all the
agencies, including public and private sectors, in pooling their resources to promote sports
in the country. This is particularly necessary in the context of financial constraints, both
at the Central and State levels”.
5. At that time, the Committee discussed at length the involvement of Public and Private sector
in the Promotion of Sports. The Committee had detailed interactions with many reputed Public and
Private sector companies/undertakings such as TISCO, ITC, Hinduja, Escorts, UCO Bank, SBI,
IOB, BHEL, IOC, ONGC, Air India, Indian Airlines, SAIL, Peerless, Sanghi Group, CIL, Punjab and
Sind Bank etc. on the subject.
6. The Committee, in its above Report, had also recommended that each major industrial
house, both public and private sector, should be asked to adopt one sports discipline and they
should take the total responsibility of scouting talent and nurturing the same, including their
participation in various national and international events. On reciprocal basis, the concerned
industrial house should have its nominee in the concerned national federation/association. The
Committee again reiterates its recommendation and also suggests that major industrial
house should adopt, at least, one sport discipline and nurture the same if sports culture in
this country is to be evolved.
7. It also emerged out of those deliberations, that contributions were being received from
organizations at that time also but there was no mechanism for keeping and managing that
contribution. After the above said Report of the Committee, the Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports and Government of India (GOI) had established the National Sports Development Fund in
1998. However, since its inception adequate funds could not be collected which indicates that
the Department did not make sincere efforts to approach the Corporate and the Public
sector for contribution to the Fund.
8. In its 34th Report the Committee had also pointed out that there has been a lot of
duplication of efforts by the various sports control boards and bodies like Railways, P&T, Banks,
Steel Plants etc. in promotion of sports without any co-ordination with each other. The Committee
had further pointed out that there was also a lack of co-operation and communication between
different bodies, boards, SAI and sports federations. The Committee was not happy with the
chaotic situation and the lack of co-ordination between the various bodies leading to wastage of
scarce funds and time.

3
9. The Committee finds that the situation has not improved till now. The NSDF corpus
is still scarce, not many public and private organizations are coming forward to contribute
to the Fund and there is a lot of overlapping in promotion of sports as respective
organizations are following their own pattern so far as development of sports is concerned.
Further, the Committee notes that even from the scarce resources available with the NSDF,
there is laxity on the part of the Department in spending the same which shows lack of
commitment on the part of the Department to promote sports in true earnest. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Sports and SAI should take
steps to evolve an effective mechanism for regular dialogue and co-ordination with the
sports boards of the various organizations and federations so that duplication of efforts and
wastage of precious time and scarce fund is avoided.
10. So far as the performance of the National Sports Development Fund is concerned, the
Committee understands that it has a mandate to give financial assistance for various activities for
overall promotion of sports in the country. Accordingly, the Fund is supposed to have continuous
flow of funds in the form of contributions and donations from various sources. The Committee was
given to understand that with the establishment of Fund in 1998, the Central Government made a
contribution of `2.00 crore as seed money. After that, the Government’s contribution to the fund is
on matching basis to the contributions received from other sources/donors. As on 31.12.2014, the
National Sports Development Fund had a corpus of `113.14 crore only. It was also informed that
over the years most generous contribution to this fund came from BCCI and JP industries. Otherwise
small amount of donations were being made to the Fund by the other organizations both government
and private. The following table indicates the contributions made to NSDF since its inception:-
Year Name of the Donor Amount Government
donated of India
( in `) matching
contribution
(in `)
12 3 4
1998-99 - - 2,00,00,000
(Seed Money)
1999-2000 Rural Electrification Power Corporation Ltd. 5,00,000 1,60,000
Oriental Bank of Commerce 5,00,000
M/s Balmer Lawrie & Co Ltd 1,00,000
Punjab National Bank 50,000
National Mineral Development Corporation 10,000
TOTAL 11,60,000
2000-01 Naptha Jhakri Power Corporation Ltd 2,00,000 1,25,00,000
Power Finance Corporation 2,00,000
Shri Kapil Dev (he had contributed `77.41 Lacs 1,21,00,000
during 1994-95; this amount, lying unutilized in
the National Welfare Fund for sportspersons, with
interest transferred to NSDF with the consent of
Shri Kapil Dev)
TOTAL 1,25,00,000

4
2001-02 Housing and Urban Development Corporation 25,00,000 25,00,000
Limited (HUDCO)
T
OTAL 25,00,000
2002-03 - - -
2003-04 Punjab National Bank 5,00,000 19,46,050
Export Import Bank of India 5,00,000
Bank of India 50,000
Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd. 1,00,000
North Eastern Electric Power Corporation of India 20,000
State Bank of Mysore 25,000
National Mineral Development Corporation 25,000
Union Bank of India 1,00,000
State Bank of India 5,00,000
Central Bank of India 1,25,000
Shri KS Rana 300
Shri K P Kanhaiya 250
Shri S K Gupta 500
T
OTAL (2003-04) 19,46,050
2004-05 Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. 5,00,000 1983599
Videocon International Ltd 1,20000
State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur 20000
Oriental Bank of Commerce 300000
Puzzolan Machinery Fabricators 400000
Funds collected through Flag Distribution on 643649
National Sports Day
TOTAL (2004-05) 1983649
2005-06 Jindal Steel and Power Ltd 2500000 2879027
Funds collected through flag distribution on 378352
National Sports Day
TOTAL 2878352
2006-07 Funds collected through flag distribution on 84219
National Sports Day
TOTAL 84219
2007-08 S teel Authority of India Ltd.(SAIL) 10000000 50000000
Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) 150000000
TOTAL 160000000
2008-09 Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) 350000000 102500000
TOTAL 350000000
12 3 4

5
2009-10 Rai Foundation 1000000 81200000
State Government of Madhya Pradesh 10000000
State Government of Haryana 10000000
TOTAL 21000000
2010-11 200000000
2011-12 State Government of Maharashtra 10000000 50000000
Jaypee Sports International Limited 100000000
TOTAL 110000000
2012-13 Jaypee Sports International Limited 100000000 50000000
TOTAL 100000000
2013-14 Jaypee Sports International Limited 100000000 50000000
Individual contribution 20
T
OTAL 10000020 37500000
2014-15
GRAND T OTAL (As on 31.03.2014) 86,40,52,290 61,41,68,676
11. The Committee learnt that BCCI gave maximum contribution to NSDF. However, the
income tax exemption was denied to them. The income tax authorities stated that BCCI was
engaged in cricket, so their involvement in other sports is not justified. The Committee considers
this the most bizarre justification to extract income tax. The Committee feels that Revenue
Department has not understood the spirit of NSDF. Many organization whether PSUs, Banks or
Private Organization have their own core business, however, they have been contribution to the
cause of sports, while the BCCI being richest sports body is morally bound to help other sports
in the country.
12. The Committee hopes that in future also, the BCCI will give its generous contribution. The
Committee also directs Department of Revenue to understand the spirit of NSDF as the
contributions towards this Fund cannot be charged for income tax. If at all this has been done in
the past it should be reversed with true sportsman spirit.
13. During its interaction with the Public Sector Banks and Public Sector Undertakings at
Kolkata, Mumbai and Bengaluru on the promotion of Sports and contribution to NSDF, the
following facts emerged with regard to promotion of sports and performance of the NSDF:
— Coal India Limited has its own Sports Policy according to which all activities for
promotion of Sports and Culture of CIL and its subsidiary companies are conducted
under the aegis of Coal India Sports Promotion Association (CISPA) which is an
autonomous body, registered under West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961 in
2013.
— However, under the Sports Policy of Coal India Limited there is a provision that all
coal companies will contribute @25 paise per tonne of coal produced (in the previous
year) and non-coal producing companies will also contribute as per decision taken
from time to time to the corpus for CISPA for conducting promotional activities
regarding sports and culture.
12 3 4

6
— Contributions of the subsidiary companies for the last two financial years are given
below:
Company Contribution in ` lakh
2014-15 2015-16
ECL 90.14 100.03
BCCL 81.54 86.28
CCL 125.06 139.10
NCL 171.60 181.21
WCL 99.32 102.87
SECL 310.65 320.69
MCL 276.10 303.45
TOTAL 1154.40 1233.62
— United Bank of India (UBI) submitted that the CSR activities of the Bank are generally
related with the development of the weaker sections of the society on cluster basis.
However, the bank draws up annual plan of expenditure for promotion of sports and
games within the institution. As bank incurred loss of `1231 crore during financial year
2013-14 still under stress on profit and capital, no fund has been earmarked for CSR
to be spent on sports.
— The Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) submitted that over the year DVC has made
a conscious effort through its CSR activities to promote sports in rural areas and
among the local community and especially amongst the indigenous tribal population.
The budget allocation for CSR activities of DVC clearly earmarked for promotion of
rural sports. The amount so allocated varied year to year depending on the programme
identified but it generally varies from 3 to 5 per cent of the budget allocated for socio
economic development part of CSR.
— On the issue of contribution to NSDF the SBI Chairman submitted that as per records
the Bank is not making any specific contributions to NSDF. Further, as the Bank is
taking care of the training needs and other sporting needs / requirements of the
sportspersons, there was no occasion for making any specific contributions to NSDF.
However, this did not deter the Bank from honouring the noted sportspersons of the
country for their excellent performances at the International levels as and when the
occasion has demanded for the purpose.
— The ONGC submitted that ONGC had an approved Corporate Sports Policy since 1998
and revised in 2008. Promotion of sports activities is being governed in ONGC through
this. ONGC has a positive and forward looking approach vis-a-vis promotion of sports
through the provisions of Corporate Social Responsibility. Consequent upon the
amendment to Schedule VII of the Companies Act 2013, ONGC has given additional
focus to promote nationally recognized sports including sports that are popular in rural
areas. Through its efforts the Corporate Sports Division had made ONGC a premier
organization in India for implementing the given sports policy for promotion of sports.

7
— As far as ONGC is concerned the representative added that ONGC was allocating 2%
of Net Profit every year to CSR as per the guidelines of Government of India, and
expenditure on many sports activities is met from the CSR funds. A substantial amount
of CSR fund was earmarked / utilized for sports and there has not been any instance
when sports activity is not undertaken due to lack of fund.
14. From the above discussions the Committee can conclude that most of the Public
Sector Banks and Public Sector Undertakings were not aware of the existence of the
National Sports Development Fund or were linking it with the Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR) activities.
15. The Committee also found that the Banks and CPSUs were spending crores of rupees
every year independently in the name of sports mainly for entertainment purposes or for
their commercial publicity in the form of giving sponsorship to tournaments, annual meets
smaller cash awards at local levels, except some of them like ONGC, Indian Oil, Air India,
HAL and a few banks. There is no coordination/linkage of any kind amongst them in this
regard. The Committee also found that the direction of and the manner which sports
activities are being done is not going to develop sports in the country. The Committee is
not for stopping such activities being undertaken by banks/PSUs, it feels that the monies
currently being spent could be put to much better use if a good part of it goes to NSDF,
a centralized and specialized mechanism for the development of sports in the country. It
also came up during the deliberations with these PSUs/Banks that they were ready to put
good amount of money to this Fund and some of them even promised to do so in future.
The Committee was in fact happily surprised to know this and felt encouraged to take up
this issue with the concerned Secretaries to the Ministries/Departments at Delhi to impress
upon them to find out if some kind of guidelines/norms, formal or informal could laid down
and an inter-ministerial body could be created for promoting, coordinating and monitoring
this Fund. The Committee feels a good amount of funds can be allocated that way to be
better used for the sports development.
16. Against this backdrop, the Committee decided to further deliberate on the issue.
Accordingly, the Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Sports along with Director General,
Sports Authority of India (SAI), Secretary, Department of Financial Services, Secretary Department
of Public Enterprises, Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training and the Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs on the issue of contributions to the National Sports
Development Fund in its meeting held on the 17th July, 2015.
17. The Secretary, Department of Sports informed the Committee that sports primarily is a
State subject. However, the Department of Sports along with the Sports Authority of India and
National Sports Federations played a very important role for sports and sportspersons at national
and international level. Training, coaching and participation at international level by sportspersons
were the main activities requiring greater financial resources. For this purpose beside the central
budgetary support, the Department had created the National Sports Development Fund to channelize
the corporate sector contribution for promotion of sports. He further submitted that, so far, only
limited resources had been tapped under the National Sports Development Fund and the Department
would strive to engaged Public Sector Banks/Public Sector Undertakings to contribute more to the
NSDF.
18. The Secretary, Department of Financial Services informed the Committee that there were
only 26 public sector banks, 4-5 Insurance Companies and 4-5 other financial institutions under the
Department. Since the Banks were not companies, the provisions of the Companies Act were not
applicable to them and there was no responsibility on the Public Sector Banks to spend minimum
two per cent on CSR activities. In spite of this, the banks had been doing good work under CSR

8
activities. He mentioned that some of the financial institutions, however, were adopting particular
sport and contributing to NSDF. He suggested that provision of the Companies Act regarding
spending of two per cent of the profit under CSR should be made applicable to the private
companies also. On the point of contribution by the Public Sector Banks to NSDF, he submitted
that Banks could only be requested to contribute.
19. The Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises stated that schedule VII of the Companies
Act mentioned only five funds, namely, Fund for Swachh Bharat Kosh, Fund for Clean Ganga,
Fund for Prime Minister’s National Relief and Fund for T echnological Incubation in Academic
Institutions. He suggested that the National Sports Development Fund could be made part of that
schedule so that Companies  could contribute to NSDF also. From the above discussion, the
Committee feels that there is an urgent need to focus on the following aspects of NSDF.
Publicity for National Sports Development Fund
20. From the Committee’s extensive deliberations with the stakeholders, it clearly
emerged that many public sector organizations and institutions were not aware of the
existence of the NSDF, its mandate and purpose. Most of the organizations mixed it with
the Corporate Social Responsibility. The Committee observes that the Department of Sports
should take steps to widely publicize the NSDF, its mandate, function and achievements to
attract contribution from all the Public and Private Sector Institutions. The Department
should publish a booklet on NSDF, highlighting its mandate, purpose, mode of contributions
to the fund by the stakeholders, and its achievements in promoting sports.
21. The Committee also recommends that once a sportsperson is selected for financial
support under NSDF or by the PSB/PSU/organizations, that financial support should continue
till the time the sportsperson attains a certain level. There should be no break in the
financial support to a sportsperson as the same could lead him/her to-drop out of the sports.
Thus, financial support should be on continuous basis.
Inclusion of NSDF in Schedule VII of the Companies Act
22. The Committee notes that another suggestion put forth by the stakeholders was that
NSDF should be included in Schedule VII of the Companies Act. The Committee
recommends that the Companies Act should be amended accordingly, once it is included in
Schedule VII, not only the government sector companies/PSUs but also private companies
will start making contributions to this Fund. This will certainly ensure continuous and
consistent fund flow to NSDF.
23. The Committee further feels that the Public Sector Banks while contributing their
funds for the promotion of sports may bifurcate their contribution in two segments. They
can contribute to the National Sports Development Fund and at the same time can approach
schools/colleges in rural areas and, if possible, adopt one of the sports by investing in
infrastructure and other sports facility in the schools/colleges in the rural areas.
24. The Committee, therefore, recommends that this contribution to NSDF for promotion
of any recognized sports, sports academy/a group of elite athletes may be allowed and
specifically mentioned as permissible activity for CSR contribution to ‘Funds’ specified in
Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2013. In view of poor upkeep maintenance of our SAI
Centres and need for modern equipments/facilities in them, the contribution to SAI for
construction repair, modernization of sports infrastructure/operation such as talent search
and development; national/regional competitions maintenance with respect to its regional
centres, STCs, SAG Centres, NSAs may be specifically mentioned in permissible CSR

9
expenditure under CSR Rules by issuing a circular from the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
The Department of Sports may follow this up with the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
Further, the Committee feels that mandatory CSR provision need to be made applicable
with respect to Insurance and Banking Sector as well as Companies Act does not cover
them.
25. The Committee also recommends that a certain percentage of Education Cess may be
earmarked for sports promotion as it is our integral part of education as per the Education
Policy. This could be around 0.25 percent for sports leaving 2.75 percent for education. The
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports may follow it up with the Ministry of HRD and
Ministry of Finance for this purpose.
Wider Representation in Council And Executive Committee of the National Sports
Development Fund
26. For the management and administration of NSDF, a council is constituted by the
Central Government. This council has representation from the Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports, SAI and eminent sportspersons representing corporate sector, private foundations
and non-profit voluntary organizations. The Committee feels that if the Department of
Sports expects adequate funding from the Public Sector Banks and Public Sector
Undertakings, it should give adequate representation to the other concerned Ministries and
organizations on the council. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that 4-5 PSUs/
Banks/Private bodies/Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Department of Financial Services and
Department of Public Enterprises should be given representation in the council. Similarly,
day to day working of the Fund is managed by an Executive Committee which have
representation from the Ministries of Youth Affairs and Sports and Human Resource
Development only. The Committee feels that the Executive Committee should also have
wide representations for managing the day to day working of the Fund. Accordingly 4-5
PSUs/Banks/Private bodies/Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Department of Financial Services
and Department of Public Enterprises should be given representation in the Executive
Committee also.
27. The Committee also takes this opportunity to point out that the scheme of NSDF was
framed in the year 1998. At that time, Youth Affairs and Sports was one of the Department
under the Ministry of Human Resource Development. This explains the presence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development in the composition of the
council and the Executive Committee. Now that the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports
has become a full fledged Ministry, the presence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Human Resource Development seems to be inconsistent in the scheme. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports to relook into the
provision and amend it accordingly.
II
RECRUITMENT AND PROMOTION OF SPORTSPERSONS
28. The Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons is also one of the important areas meriting
serious consideration. Accordingly, the Committee took up this issue also during its study visit to
Kolkata, Mumbai and Bengaluru while interacting with PSBs and PSUs.
29. The representative of CIL submitted that direct recruitment of Sportsperson having National
and/or International repute was being done. Such recruitment was done on the recommendations

10
of Apex Body after observing different procedural formalities as per norms of the Company at
different levels based on the performance of the sports persons. The Number of sportspersons to
be recruited in different grades was decided on the basis of the recommendations of the Apex Body
of Coal India Sports Promotion Association (CISPA).
30. The representative of CIL further added that CISPA had initiated a programme to identify
employees who have the technical competence to organize Sports/Games and maintain a panel. To
make up the shortage of Sports Officials, courses were conducted by drawing interested employees
from subsidiaries in association with the affiliated bodies who could ultimately produce technically
accepted sports officials. CIL facilitates/assisted in conducting the official examination of State/
National Federations. The Technical officials imparted services, as and when required by the
companies.
31. The representatives of United Bank of India submitted that the Bank had a Sports Control
Board which has been set up for promotion of sports in the bank. Although the Bank had not
framed any definite Sports policy for promotion of sports in the country but the Bank had on
several occasions recruited outstanding sportsmen belonging to various disciplines and had built up
an excellent team of outstanding sports personalities in the field of football, cricket and table tennis.
Many of the players recruited by the Bank brought honors in various sporting events across the
country. They had been permitted to take part in various national as well as state level tournaments
organized by various State Associations affiliated to AIFF, BCCI and TTFI. The tournaments
arranged with active participation of star sportspersons of the Bank had contributed a lot in
promotion of national level as well as state level sports. The Bank always followed the instruction;
guideline from the Ministry in any HR related matter. However, the Bank had not received any
specific instructions/guidelines from the Ministry regarding recruitment of sportspersons of late.
The sportspersons recruited in various disciplines were assigned official duties as also permitted to
take part in any sports meet, both at State and at National level enjoying time off and special leave
approved by the Management. Bank initiated the process of recruitment of sportsperson in the year
2012 but due to financial constraints in the subsequent year, the recruitment process could not be
completed.
32. The representative of UCO Bank submitted that Bank had been putting efforts in promotion
of sports and had been recruiting sports persons. Promotion of sports was being undertaken under
Corporate Social Responsibility Programme. Bank had promoted sports in schools, colleges and
sports clubs by way of adoption of schools and donation/sponsorships of various sports.
33. The representative of the Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) submitted that the following
initiatives were being made to encourage rural youth to embrace sports activities as part of their
life since a long time past:
(i) Developing sports infrastructure in villages like creating new play ground and
renovation of existing ground through land levelling, grass pitching, erecting Goal post
etc.
(ii) Interschool athletic meet were organised by DVC and school students were sponsored
to take part in district level meet.
In addition to above, enhancement of Budget i.e. upto 10 percent of socio economic part
of CSR Budget and opening of Sports Academy at Maithon, DVC were being contemplated.
34. The IDBI Bank representative submitted that it had been recruiting sports persons since
1977-78 from the field of Cricket, Kabbadi, football, Chess and Table Tennis. The last recruitment
for sportspersons was made in 1996 for recruiting outstanding sports persons of Cricket, Table
Tennis and Chess.

11
35. In terms of Government of India guidelines circulated vide letter dated November 16, 1992,
the recruitment of sports persons was made through advertisement at sub staff, clerical and officer
level. The bank followed the GoI guidelines in respect of age, education qualification and level of
participation (district, state or national level) for recruitment of sports persons in various cadres.
36. The gist of extant guidelines regarding recruitment and level of participation, inter-alia,
indicate sports person between the age of 18 to 26, who had played at district level were eligible
for sub staff category, state level sports persons are eligible for clerical cadre and national level
players were eligible for appointment in officer cadre. The guidelines also listed out the names of
the sports which could be considered for carrying out the recruitment.
37. The IDBI Bank representative submitted that it had been recruiting outstanding
sportspersons since 1977-78 in Officers / Class-III / Class-IV cadres from various sports viz.
Cricket, Football, Table Tennis, Kabbadi & Chess. IDBI Bank actively promoted and encouraged
employees to participate in sports activities. The IDBI Sports Club, Corporate Centre Mumbai and
the Zonal Sports Committees were entrusted with the responsibility of conducting sports activities
at the respective locations for employees every year. He further added that the Bank had been
allocating funds towards promotion of sports among its employees within the ambit of Staff
Welfare Activities. The Bank had been conducting sporting activities such as cricket, football,
badminton & athletic tournaments.
38. The IDBI Bank had since 1977-78 recruited 29 sports person in various cadres based on
the level of participation and the eligibility qualification. The recruitment for sports persons was last
made in 1996 for recruiting outstanding players in Cricket, Table Tennis and Chess. The Bank had
then selected a total of 9 players in Cricket, Table Tennis and Chess. The appointment of state level
players was made at clerical / sub ordinate cadre and national level players were appointed as
officers.
39. The representative of SBI submitted that State Bank of India had recognized eleven games,
viz. Athletics, Basketball, Chess, Cricket, Football, Hockey, Kabaddi, Shuttle Badminton, Table
Tennis, Tennis, V olleyball for championing its cause and necessary funds were allocated by
Corporate Centre from the staff welfare fund to the Circles on yearly basis for furtherance of the
sporting activities among the employees. The Bank had been organizing Inter Circle Tournaments
in the recognized games of the Bank to generate a level of competition among the employees of
the Circles by striving for excellence in their performances, apart from fostering a spirit of
participation, friendship and fraternity.
40. The Sports Control Board (SCB) was the apex sports body / authority of the SBI and it
came into existence in the year 1963 with the objective to encourage, promote, develop, maintain
and regulate sports and games in SBI. The SCB had been instrumental in providing the impetus to
the spread of culture of sports primarily through recruitment of successful sports personalities in
various disciplines and nurturing the upcoming talents. The inter-circle tournaments in various
disciplines of outdoor and indoor games had thrown out a spirit of excellence and generated a
sense of camaraderie among the State Bankers from across the country. The Board in its meeting
decided the particular type of Inter Circle sports and games to be organized, the time schedule to
be followed, the venue for the meets and allocates such amounts as may be needed for the
purpose. Apart from the teams from the 14 Circles, the team(s) of Associate Banks were also
allowed to participate in the sports events of SBI.
41. The representative of the SBI informed about the Benefits! Facilities available to
Sportspersons besides conduct of Inter Circle tournaments, the Bank provided the facility of special
leave to sportsperson employees for participating in the tournaments in the recognized games held
at National/International/State, including Junior National levels and Veteran Sportsperson

12
tournaments to the extent of 30 days at any one instance and maximum 180 days in a calendar
year with additional leave for foreign tours and coaching camps. Requests for special leave to
attend selection trials/selection camps/coaching camps/physical training camps etc. held for
selection of State/National teams were also considered. Leave of the above nature beyond 30 days
in one instance was also sanctioned in deserving cases. Employees who officiate as Coaches,
Managers, Selectors, Referees, Judges, and Umpires etc. in the Junior National/National/
International level tournaments were also entitled to special leave. Active sportspersons were also
given a reasonable time off for practice during the season the game was played and the extent
of time off is determined according to the nature of the game.
42. On the recruitment of sportsperson the representative of SBI submitted that encouragement
to sports by the Bank started on a significant scale in the early 1960’s. Sportsmen of repute in
games like cricket. Football, hockey, table tennis, basketball, volleyball, athletics and few other
games were appointed on ad hoc basis and were given various other facilities in pursuit of
excellence in their respective games. The players with requisite qualification and having represented
the country at international levels were recruited as Probationary Officers. Excellence in the
performance used to be recognised and rewarded through promotion.
43. The present policy regarding recruitment of sportsperson, which was modified as per the
Govt. of Guidelines issued on 16.11.92, was approved by the Sports Control Board of the Bank
based on its objective to encourage, promote, develop, maintain and regulate sports and games
in SBI. As per the extant guidelines issued by the Sports Control Board, sportspersons proficient
in the 6 games, viz. Cricket, Football, Hockey, Basketball, V olleyball and Kabaddi were considered
for recruitment. Exceptions may be made for outstanding sportspersons in other disciplines on
merits.
44. Out of the total strength of 795 sportspersons in the Bank at present, 420 sportspersons
were recruited under sports quota. The SBI had been allocating funds to the Circles to the tune
of `3.00 crore on an yearly basis out of the total welfare fund for holding Inter-Circle Tournaments
in the game of Cricket, Football, Hockey, Basketball, V olleyball, Table Tennis apart from some other
fund to meet the Circle’s requirements for promotion / conduct of various other sporting activities
at the local level. On the sportsperson recruited in SBI through sports quota, the SBI Chairman
added that out of the present strength of 795 sportspersons in the Bank, 420 were recruited under
sports quota. The category-wise details of jobs were as under:
Officers – 214
Clerical - 199
Sub-staff -7
Total - 420
The selection criteria for sportspersons was as under:
Eligibility Norms:
1. Age - for all category staff - Between 18 & 26 years. Relaxation in age will be
permitted in the case of reserved categories as per guidelines issued by the
Government from time to time.
2. Educational Qualifications:
Officers: Graduation in any discipline.

13
Clerical: SSC /SSLC / Matriculation or equivalent
Sub-staff: Vth Standard pass with ability to read and write
3. Sports Qualifications:
Officers: Should have represented the country or won an Arjun Award or represented
the State with distinction for at least five years in Continuation.
Clerical: Should have represented the State in National event, or the District in State
level event or the University in an Inter-University event with distinction or if he was
a member of the Combined Universities Team with distinction.
Sub-staff: Should have represented the District in a State level event or should have
participated in a All India School event with distinction.
45. State Bank of India submitted that due publicity to the Bank’s requirements was given
through an advertisement. On receipt the applications were scrutinized by the competent authority.
Candidates found to possess the qualifications as stated above were called for an interview and
selections made strictly on merit. Since recruitment was on the basis of sports qualifications,
maximum weightage will be given to this factor as well as to the age of candidates. The bank
should not consider for recruitment those sportspersons who were already working in some other
bank, unless the application was routed through the employer bank. Usual character verification and
medical tests was done in respect of candidates recruited. Recruitment would be done in the same
manner as was done for regular candidates selected for appointment.
The other conditions were:-
“a) All appointments under this scheme shall be entirely at the discretion of the Bank and
shall be made at the starting stage of the pay scales admissible to the posts.
b) Appointment in the Officers’ cadre will be made at the minimum of the pay scale for
officers in JMGS-I and will be governed by the rules / policies in force from time to
time.
c) All appointments will be on probation for the same period as for general candidates.
d) At the time of appointment, the candidate must be an active sportsperson and should
be fit enough to take part in future tournaments.
e) Sports certificates / achievements may be verified from the issuing authorities
independently. In case of any doubt, the candidate may be asked to give a
demonstration in the game in which he / she claims to be meritorious.
f) Only Indian citizens are eligible for appointment under this scheme.
g) Certificates and credentials will have to be submitted before appointment.
h) Appointment of sportspersons will normally be done at the headquarters of the LHO
to enable them to have practice sessions etc. and requests for transfer elsewhere shall
not be entertained as long as they are active players. Sportspersons from a particular
discipline may be posted at other centres if practice / training facilities are available
at such centres and the number of players at the centre justifies the measure.”
46. The representative of SBI further added that there was no examination, provided that
sportspersons fulfilled the eligibility criteria in respect of educational standards, age etc. and their

14
applications were approved by the President, Circle Welfare Committee after scrutiny by the Circle
Welfare Committee, provided that the sportsperson being considered for appointment had applied
for the vacancy sanctioned by Corporate Centre keeping in view the ceiling fixed by the GOI for
such appointments in a year. The candidates administratively cleared by the above authorities were
interviewed by the CGM, one GM of the concerned LHO and two eminent sportspersons nominated
by the Sports Control Board, Corporate Centre. The candidates so selected were offered
appointment in the Bank subject to their completing the other formalities such as satisfactory
reports from the references, medical examination and verification of antecedents, etc. CGM of the
Circle appointed in either subordinate or clerical cadre. The Dy. Managing Director & CDO was
the competent authority for such appointments in the Officers’ cadre. However, such appointment
in the officers’ cadre should be finally approved by the Executive Committee of the Central Board
of the Bank.
47. The BOI representative submitted it had taken the following steps to promote the National
sports and recruitment of sportspersons in our Bank and was granting Duty Leave to the
sportspersons for participating in various sports events at State, National and International level.
Reimbursement of travelling expenses and payment of Diet allowances were also made to them.
Sportspersons were provided with kits wherever necessary for the related sports. Sportspersons
were being extended relaxed working hours and Duty Leave for pre-tournament practice. Bank had
established Zonal Sports Committees at each Zone which took care of sports activity in the Zones.
In addition to that, Bank had established Sports Control Board at apex level. Inter Zone tournaments
for various sports were conducted every year.
48. The Bank of India had been recruiting sportspersons in the past who had represented in
State/ National or International level tournaments in various sports activities viz. Cricket, Football
Kabbadi, Carrom, Kho-Kho, Athletics, Badminton etc. Bank was also engaging sportspersons in the
age group of 18 to 21 years on monthly scholarship basis. Presently, BOI had engaged 20
sportspersons on scholarship basis. They were being paid monthly stipend of `6,000/- p.m. and
they were also insured for `2.00 lakhs against accidental injury. Out of turn increments were
granted to around 115 sportspersons for participation in National events and out of turn promotion
was given to the sportspersons for representing India in International Events.
49. Bank of India representative further added that it recruited outstanding sportspersons based
on BSB norms and MOF guidelines. Provision for 1 out-of-turn promotion to an officer employee
in entire service period for winning a medal in International events, or a National Award in any
sports by the Government of India. On promotion, active Officer sportspersons were retained in
parent state. Award Staff Employees appointed as sportspersons had preference over the Transfer
diary.
50. Bank of India had active Sports Employees who were entitled for Special Leave of
maximum 30 days in a year. Providing 2 hours of permission everyday to all active sportspersons
to attend to regular practice session and reimbursed, TA/DA expenses for all participating
employees as per rates applicable to Officers in JMGS-I. The Bank also provided Sports Kits
required by teams on yearly basis.
51. Bank of India had also taken 86 players during past 2 years as Stipendiary players and
selection was based on criteria such as Age, Educational and Sports Qualifications and
discipline as specified by Banks’ Sports Control Board (BSB).Bank’s Board had sanctioned 29
vacancies to be filled as in the Clerical cadre during FY 2015-16 and the process for which
was on. The Bank of India had been recruiting sportspersons in the past who had
represented in State/ National or International level tournaments in various sports activities
viz. Cricket, Football, Kabbadi, Carrom, Kho-Kho, Athletics, Badminton etc. Bank was also
engaging sportspersons in the age group of 18 to 21 years on monthly scholarship basis.

15
Presently, BOI had engaged 20  sportspersons on scholarship basis. They were being paid
monthly stipend of `6,000/- p.m. and they are also been insured for `2.00 lakhs against
accidental injury. Out of turn increments were granted to around 115 sportspersons for
participation in National events and out of turn promotion was given to the sportspersons for
representing India in International Events.
52. Union Bank of India had recruited about 200  sportspersons through sports quota in
clerical and a few in sub-staff cadre. Bank had also taken 44 players during 2014-15  and 42
during 2013-14  as stipendiary players. The selection was based on the criteria such as Age,
Educational and Sports Qualifications and discipline. Recently, the Bank’s Board had sanctioned
29 vacancies to be filled up in the clerical cadre during FY 2015-16, the process for which was
on. Bank had written to the IBPS for conducting Common Recruitment Process for
sportspersons. The Bank had also taken up the matter with the IBA for formulating a common
Sports Recruitment Policy for PSBs.
53. Thereafter, the Committee also interacted with the representative of PSUs like Indian Oil,
BPCL, HPCL and Air India on the promotion of sports and recruitment of sportspersons in PSUs.
54. The representative of Indian Oil Corporation submitted that Indian Oil had identified ten
games i.e. Cricket, Hockey, Badminton, Tennis, Table Tennis, Golf, Billiards / Snooker, Athletics,
Chess and Carrom as thrust games. Over the years, 105  sportspersons in Men / Women category
had been recruited in the identified thrust games. Out of 105 sportspersons, as on date 55 were
active sportsperson and were regularly participating at National/International level. After decline of
their performance in sports at competitive level, 44 players were pursuing long term career in
Indian Oil. In addition 12 players were engaged on Tenure Basis.
55. The representative of HPCL submitted that HPCL had a policy of direct recruitment of
sportspersons in the past. Now, the bank had a policy to engage sportspersons on scholarship/
contract basis. As a part of women empowerment and encouragement of sports among women,
the bank had also got management approval to engage women players in Tennis/ Athletics/
Badminton disciplines. Sportspersons directly recruited by HPCL had been working in various
departments. Few of the sportspersons had been promoted to Middle Management (Managerial)
position as well.
56. The representative of BPCL submitted that BPCL had been recruiting sports persons as per
approved Sports Recruitment Policy. Out of the total number of 84 recruited sportspersons in
BPCL, 58 had represented the country in various international events such as the World
Championships, Olympics, Asian and Commonwealth Games. At present, the bank had the
following sportspersons on its rolls in either the Management or Non-Management cadres:
Sl  Discipline No. of Recruited Category
No. Players
12 3 4
1. Badminton 8 All Management
2. Chess 7 All Management
3. Cricket 18 16 Management & 2
Non-Management
4. Table Ten nis 4 All Management
5. Hockey 17 15 Management & 2
Non-Management

16
12 3 4
6. Billiards & Snooker 3 All Management
7. Kabaddi 14 6 Management & 8
Non-Management
8. V olleyball 11 6 Management & 8
Non-Management
9. Archery 1 Management
10. Arm Wrestling 1 Management
(Physical Handicap category)
Against existing approved 88 positions, BPCL had 84 sportspersons on its rolls and planned to fill
the remaining vacancies during the next quarter.
57. The representative of Life Insurance Corporation of India submitted that LIC had initiated
special recruitment of Sportspersons under Sports Quota in the year 1981. Till date, 415
sportspersons had been recruited under Sports quota, in the six Sports disciplines as per data
tabulated below:-
SI. No. Discipline Number of Sportspersons Recruits
1. Athletics 228
2. Badminton 552
3. Carrom 16
4. Chess 13
5. Table Tennis 42
6. V olleyball 64
TOTAL 415
DoPT Circulars on Recruitment and Promotion Sportspersons
58. The Secretary, Department of Sports submitted that the DoPT, Government of India had
a policy where up to 5 percent of the positions can be taken out of the purview of normal
selection boards and be filled up by sportspersons. That too in Group C and D only. The
Committee found that the problem with this is that it is only perceptive in nature and not
mandatory. Besides, it does not automatically apply to CPSUs and is left to their discretion.
Further, there is no mechanism to monitor  the implementation of the guidelines which is why
there is no unpublished data to maintain about this either in CPSUs or in Government
Ministries/Departments. As result, we do not know whether sportspersons are being recruited
regularly or not. He submitted that this policy was implemented varyingly across different
departments. Some departments/organizations like Railway, ONGC and Oil companies were
proactively recruiting sportspersons. But many other PSUs/PSBs had a long way to go. He pointed
out that a general policy could be adopted by PSUs and PSEs to give due consideration for
employment to sportsperson. The Secretary, Department of Financial Services (DFS) informed
that various banks like SBI had recruited 420 sportspersons, Vijaya Bank (145), Syndicate Bank
(152), Central Bank of India (209), Bank of India (111) and other banks 26 each. The

17
Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) submitted that the Department was the
nodal department for PSUs and followed the policies laid down by the DoPT in terms of
recruitment and service matters. He informed that as far as recruitment was concerned there
was a policy since 1984 for recruiting sportspersons but the Department of Public Enterprises
had done an exercise in 1997 where guidelines were made. Central Public Sector Enterprises
(CPSE) had reached a certain level of maturity and decided to withdraw 696 guidelines one of
which was the sports guideline for recruitment of sportspersons. He further added that
recently, DoPT had issued new guidelines on recruitment of sportsperson and they were being
circulated to CPSEs again. The Committee was given to understand that based on performance
of a sportsperson in national and international sports event, three out of turn promotions are
to be given to the sportspersons.
59. The Committee feels that both recruitments and promotions of sportspersons were
not being given due importance. Current guidelines prescribe that Boards of Banks/PSUs
and other organizations set aside up to 5 per cent of posts to be filled by sportspersons. In
the absence of mandatory minimum cap, the banks/PSUs and other organizations have been
recruiting sportspersons in varying percentage. This is creating confusion. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that DoPT should make at compulsory for all the Ministries/
Departments to recruit 5 per cent sportspersons. The Committee would further appreciate
if DoPT gives clear instructions to all the Ministries/Departments/organizations to
effectively implement its promotion policy for the sportspersons. The Committee further
observes as follows:-
(i) Job reservation for Sportspersons may be made mandatory in Central
Government, its subordinate officers and undertaking including banks and
insurance companies;
(ii) 2 per cent vertical and 3 per cent horizontal reservation may be made
mandatory in case of shortfall in vertical reservation due to 50 per cent limit
getting breached, it should automatically get transfer to horizontal reservation;
(iii) In pay band II and III reservation for sportsperson may also be allowed for
Olympic medalist and equivalent; and
(iv) SAI can function as nodal agency and work as employment exchange for
recruitment of sportspersons.
60. It has been learnt from the representation of Anju Bobby George that DoPT circular
dated 26th July, 2012 was being restricted to the appointees from 2012 onwards when the
guidelines were re-issued and provision of three out of turn of promotions was made. The
Committee recommends that this circular should be construed as a guideline by all the
departments and they should have liberal interpretation and should not restrict it and
implement it from prospective date. This is clarificatory guideline and must be applicable in
case of all existing players. Hence, the Committee directs the Department of Customs and
other Departments that if the existing players have not been given out of turn promotions
in their career, they must be considered for three out of turn promotions in phased manner
making the post personal in case the player/employee has won medals in the /international
sporting events during the course of employment even before 2011. Such players should not
be counted as normal department employees and parity should not be drawn with regular
employees. These players are ambassadors and pride of concerned organization who are
considered as role model. The Committee also appreciated Department of Customs for
recruiting and retaining such world class players. The Department should handle such

18
players with care, dignity and respect and encourage them to provide guidance, coaching and
lecture to youngsters in schools and colleges and in the sporting complexes. They should
also be encouraged to establish own academies/coaching centres or associate themselves with
SAI or Ministry of Sports for sporting activities like coordination and motivation etc. The
Department may also come forward in establishing academies or adopting some coaching
centres where their talent could be utilized.
61. It is disheartening to note that Department of Custom has stopped paying DA to its player
employee since 1999 for attending coaching camps (national or international). The Committee feels
such practices does not go with the image of Department and recommends that Department should
pay due DA to its players for attending such camps.
62. The Committee noted that most of the sportspersons were being recruited in pay bands
I and II jobs only. The Committee feels that this practice should be rectified. A player gives,
the most productive years of his life to sports. Therefore while recruiting these
sportspersons they should be treated at par with pay band III officers based on their sports
achievements at National and International level. The Committee would appreciate if this
aspect is also considered by the DoPT in right earnest.
63. The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs submitted before the Committee that
schedule VII of the Companies Act mentioned activities to be undertaken by the Corporations under
the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). One of the activity mentioned in schedule VII was
“training to promote rural sports, nationally recognized sports, Paralympics sports and Olympic
Sports.” If contribution to NSDF by Corporations was to be included under CSR, then a liberal
interpretation of schedule VII was to be taken. He further mentioned that activities under CSR were
decided by the Board of the Company and a monitoring mechanism was being evolved to assess
CSR activities.
III
OTHER IMPORTANT ISSUES
64. The Committee also visited SAI Regional Centre at Bengaluru to see the facilities and
infrastructure and had interaction with the sports officials and eminent sportspersons Anju Bobby
George and Ashwini Nachappa. In its interaction with the sportspersons and coaches, the
Committee was informed that the coaches, who gave training, did not get any leave for coaching
and were also engaged in day to day administrative work. The sportspersons also highlighted that
they were also denied promotion in the organization. In this case, Anju Bobby George gave a
representation to the Committee. The Committee expressed its anguish and directed the Ministry to
take up the matter with Department of Custom in view of the circular issued in 2012. Anju Bobby
George gave following valid suggestion which the Committee would like the Department to
consider:-
— “Sports persons/coaches of various Government departments and public sector
companies has to be relieved from their regular duty for their specialized sports
training. A combination of regular department duty and sports training program will not
give desired results in sports. This is applicable for all the athletes/coaches who are
appointed under sports quota as well as other athletes who’re appointed on regular
basis and excelled in sports.
— Many sports persons in various departments are struggling with sports training and
regular duty. Most of them were having 12-14 hours work load and high stress and
the purpose of sports quota appointments is diluted. After the retirement from active

19
sports, the elite sportspersons service must be utilized for various sports development
activities in the country on a priority basis. The DA for athletes participating in various
International competitions/training, national competitions and national coaching camps
are not uniform and majority of the departments has stopped paying DA/TA to athletes.
Customs and Central Excise department were paying DA to their athletes for attending
national coaching camps/competitions (Domestic and international) up to the year 1999
and then had stopped permanently.
— Presently SAI is offering ‘30000 per month for an Indian national coach, for his/her
service in the national coaching camps. There are Indian coaches who’ve excelled and
produced results at World level, fighting against all odds and there is no grading
system available/in place, and all the national coaches are treated uniformly, irrespective
of their career record, knowledge, integrity or experience.
— The foreign coaches and technical staff are offered contract amount differently and
usually it varied from 5000 US$ to 1500US$ per month. The Committee finds that
there is a clear discrimination towards Indian coaches who have made World level
achievements for our country. The Indian coaches with better profile, records and
commitment and integrity are side lined due to vested interests or lack of interest.
Indian coaches who have made most outstanding results at World level should be
treated at par with foreign coaches in remuneration and other support.
— Indian coaches like Pullela Gopi Chand, Robert Bobby George, U. Vimal Kumar, etc
have produced World class athletes and results. Robert Bobby George has produced
the top most outstanding results of India in track and field with country’s lone World
Championships medal and World Athletics Final Gold medal. In 2009, as a build up to
Delhi Commonwealth Games, he was offered thirty thousand rupees per month as
contract amount but at the same time foreign coaches in athletics with inferior track
record and results were paid 3 lacs to 6 lacs per month as contract amount.
— This approach would definitely destroy the top most coaches of India. The Foreign
coaches were hired for more than 25 years in SAI with very high contract amount
and we cannot depend on them forever and the country has to build its own coaching
system and develop its own coaches.
— That sports quota appointments has reduced substantially in the recent years in many
Government organizations and public sector companies. The
 Committee further points
out that there are no guidelines to follow. Most of the department heads/sports officers
make appointments of their personal choice or personal motive. In most of the cases
this gives space for partiality and corruption. Presently, the sports ministry has
restricted sports persons appointments in SAI alone. We need more representation of
sports icons in the administrative cadre of Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports. Most
of the Central Government departments doesn’t follow the order and the guidelines of
DoPT on out of turn promotion of sports persons (dated on 26th July, 2012).
— There should be more career opportunities for women athletes in India. Sports are a
powerful medium which has wider acceptance and visibility across the society. We
should make a special scheme “women empowerment through sports” to  break the
taboos which exists in many communities and regions of the country.
— The School Games Federation is working independently and they don’t make a
competition calendar jointly with National Federations. Moreover, different boards have
different competitions and Junior Athletes suffer a lot with the clash of dates and the
ego between School Games Federation and NSFs. There is need a single School

20
Games Federation which includes all state boards CBSE, ICSE and other boards. This
should also be applicable to AIU (All India University) competitions as well. The
present incentive structure of Union Sports Ministry has to be revised. Tough and
Bigger competitions has to be given proper weight age. Many top competitions are
either not identified or listed. World Marathon, World race walking, Indoor athletic
championship (both world and continental) world athletics final etc. are not listed”.
65. The Committee interacted with the officials of the CPWD in the SAI centre at Bengaluru.
The Committee found that CPWD did not maintain the infrastructure facilities like Table Tennis
Stadium, Gymnasium, Badminton and Basketball Courts  at the SAI Centre. The Committee found
that these facilities were in pathetic condition. The Committee visited the running track at the
centre and found that sub-standard material was used in the laying of the running track. The
Committee also found that the football ground did not have proper turf for playing. The Committee
was anguished to  see that many of the shooting ranges were not properly maintained.
66. The Committee recommends that SAI and the Department of Sports should give
funds for proper maintenance of the sports facilities at SAI centres in India. The
Department of Sports should also ask the PSUs, PSBs and other organizations to adopt one
of the sports disciplines and improve the facilities at the SAI centre.
67. The representative of BEL submitted that BEL had been encouraging Sportsperson recruited
in the company and the following benefits under the scheme are admissible for employees who had
been conferred with the following awards:
a) Arjuna Award
b) Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna Award
c) Medals in International sports events while representing the country.
Recipient of Arjuna Award/Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna Award were eligible for promotion to the
next higher grade irrespective of the qualifying service required. The promotion shall be granted
separately for each award. The promotion should be without reference to the vacancies, test,
interview etc. as a onetime measure. In addition to the above, the awardee should be eligible for
one additional increment in the promoted grade. An employee who wins a medal in the International
Sports and games events while representing the country would be eligible for one additional
increment. Each of the Medals received would be considered as a separate medal for the purpose
of extending this benefit under the scheme in the International Sports or Games meet. Further, an
employee was eligible for maximum of five increments under this scheme during his/her entire
service.
Representation of Sportspersons in SAI
68. The Committee in its 34th Report on the India’s Performance in International Sports in 1995
had made the following observations on the restructuring of Sports Authority of India (SAI):-
‘one of the general complaints received by the Committee was that the sports
administrators, particularly most of the officials of the Sports Authority of India (SAI)
had no sorts background. It was cited as one of the reasons for lack of direction in the
sports arena.’
‘the Committee observed that there was a lot of dissatisfaction about the structure and
functioning of the Sports Authority of India (SAI). It was complained that SAI had
become a huge and unwieldy organization, with completely bureaucratic characteristics.
There are a number of Directors, Deputy Directors and other paraphernalia which was

21
not originally contemplated. There are a number of square pegs in the round holes. It
is a sort of inverted pyramid. All the powers are centralized at the headquarters. The
Regional Centres some of which like the Bangalore one-doing excellent work are
deprived of financial powers due to lack of autonomy. Even for small matters, they
have to get clearance from the headquarters of SAI at Delhi, including sanctioning of
small expenditure. The Committee found that such a bureaucratic functioning of the
SAI is proving to be a major obstacle in the free and smooth functioning of the
Regional Centres. The Committee feels that the Regional Centres should be delegated
adequate financial and administrative powers so as to cater to their day-to-day
requirements for the efficient and smooth functioning of these Centres. The
atmosphere in SAI needs to be made a sports-friendly rather than the existing
monolithic bureaucratic organization. The Committee feels that unless these Centres
are strengthened, we cannot expect better results from them. Work and accounts of the
Centres should be periodically audited and monitored by the competent authority. The
SAI in Delhi could be just a coordinating authority and should concentrate on policy,
planning and monitoring. There should be a Sub-Regional Centre of SAI in each State,
with a Director in charge of it’.
69. The Committee finds that there has been no change in the situation till now. The
Sports Authority of India continues to function in the same bureaucratic manner.
Surprisingly, sportspersons were not being represented at any level in the functioning of
SAI even today. Many of the Sports Institutes are headed or managed by persons not
having any sports background. The Committee feels, the situatiop requires immediate
corrective steps.
70. Involvement of sportspersons in the functioning of SAI could go a long way in
creating good infrastructure and sports facilities at every level as the sportspersons are
familiar with the kind of facilities infrastructure coaching, diet, training and support service
are required for the sportspersons.
71. The Committee further notes that there were nine regional centres of SAI
functioning at Bengaluru, Kolkata, Gandhinagar, Bhopal, Sonepat, Chandigarh, Lucknow,
Imphal and Guwahati. The Committee desires that each one of the Regional Centres
should be headed by a Regional Director with full powers are or two executive Directors
in Delhi could look after the administrative and coordinating works of the organization
as well as matters relating to the teams. A full time Chairman-cum-managing Director
with good sports background should be appointed as the Director-General of SAI.
ENGAGEMENT OF RETIRED SPORTSPERSONS AS COACHES
72. The Committee was informed that there is lack of good coaches for giving training
to juniors in the SAI centres. The Committee feels that there have been many outstanding
sportspersons who had retired from active sports and can work as coaches. The Committee
feels that such sportspersons with their experience and expertise could nurture and bring
up a new generation of sportspersons besides providing much needed financial help to
retired sportsperson.
73. While deliberating on the subject it was brought to the notice of the Committee that
BCCI was giving pension to its retired cricketers. The Committee feels that SAI should also
devise a mechanism to provide pension to the sports persons from NSDF after they retire
from active sports life. This would serve as a social security for the sports person and they
would be able to level their life independently and with dignity.

22
Sportspersons not to be Engaged in Day to Day Administrative Work
74. The Secretary DoPT had stated that many departments are engaging sportspersons in day
to day administrative work and some time they are engaged in the official work from 10-12 hours
daily. Such sportspersons are treated as regular employees and Departments assign them routine
work. The Secretary had pointed out that it was against the norms for which the sportspersons
has been recruited. He stated that it was understandable that there is shortage of manpower in
every department and regular recruitments have also not been done by certain departments, but
engaging sportspersons for such routine work is not the solution.
75. The Committee took serious note of the fact that organisations/departments, which
are recruiting sportsperson, engage them in day to day administrative work of the
organisation. The Committee feels that recruitment of a sportsperson in an organisation is
a value addition to that organisation and instead of engaging him/her in Administrative
Work, he/she should be given opportunity to excel in the sports and also to train and
mentor junior sports persons.
Equal Remunerations for Coaches
76. The Committee was also given to understand that the foreign coaches engaged by
various bodies/organisations were being paid higher remuneration vis-a-vis the Indian
coaches. The Committee feels that this practice is uncalled for if we desire to promote
sports in the country. The Committee would appreciate if grading of coaches is done and
equal and uniform remuneration is paid to both foreign and Indian coaches.

23
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATIONS AT A GLANCE
(I)
PERFORMANCE OF NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND
The Committee had also recommended that each major industrial house, both public
and private sector, should be asked to adopt one sports discipline and they should take the
total responsibility of scouting talent and nurturing the same, including their participation
in various national and international events. On reciprocal basis, the concerned industrial
house should have its nominee in the concerned national federation/association. The
Committee again reiterates its recommendation and also suggests that major industrial
house should adopt, at least, one sport discipline and nurture the same if sports culture in
this country is to be evolved. (Para 6)
The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and Government of India (GOI) had
established the National Sports Development Fund in 1998. However, since its inception
adequate funds could not be collected which indicates that the Department did not make
sincere efforts to approach the Corporate and the Public sector for contribution to the
Fund. (Para 7)
The Committee finds that the situation has not improved till now. The NSDF corpus
is still scarce, not many public and private organizations are coming forward to contribute
to the Fund and there is a lot of overlapping in promotion of sports as respective
organizations are following their own pattern so far as development of sports is concerned.
Further, the Committee notes that even from the scarce resources available with the NSDF,
there is laxity on the part of the Department in spending the same which shows lack of
commitment on the part of the Department to promote sports in true earnest. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Sports and SAI should take
steps to evolve an effective mechanism for regular dialogue and co-ordination with the
sports boards of the various organizations and federations so that duplication of efforts and
wastage of precious time and scarce fund is avoided. (Para 9)
From the above discussions the Committee can conclude that most of the Public
Sector Banks and Public Sector Undertakings were not aware of the existence of the
National Sports Development Fund or were linking it with the Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR) activities. (Para 14)
The Committee also found that the Banks and CPSUs were spending crores of rupees
every year independently in the name of sports mainly for entertainment purposes or for
their commercial publicity in the form of giving sponsorship to tournaments, annual meets
smaller cash awards at local levels, except some of them like ONGC, Indian Oil, Air India,
HAL and a few banks. There is no coordination/linkage of any kind amongst them in this
regard. The Committee also found that the direction of and the manner which sports
activities are being done is not going to develop sports in the country. The Committee is
not for stopping such activities being undertaken by banks/PSUs, it feels that the monies
currently being spent could be put to much better use if a good part of it goes to NSDF,
a centralized and specialized mechanism for the development of sports in the country. It
also came up during the deliberations with these PSUs/Banks that they were ready to put
23

24
good amount of money to this Fund and some of them even promised to do so in future.
The Committee was in fact happily surprised to know this and felt encouraged to take up
this issue with the concerned Secretaries to the Ministries/Departments at Delhi to impress
upon them to find out if some kind of guidelines/norms, formal or informal could laid down
and an inter-ministerial body could be created for promoting, coordinating and monitoring
this Fund. The Committee feels a good amount of funds can be allocated that way to be
better used for the sports development. (para 15)
Publicity for National Sports Development Fund
From the Committee’s extensive deliberations with the stakeholders, it clearly
emerged that many public sector organizations and institutions were not aware of the
existence of the NSDF, its mandate and purpose. Most of the organizations mixed it with
the Corporate Social Responsibility. The Committee observes that the Department of
Sports should take steps to widely publicize the NSDF, its mandate, function and
achievements to attract contribution from all the Public and Private Sector Institutions.
The Department should publish a booklet on NSDF, highlighting its mandate, purpose,
mode of contributions to the fund by the stakeholders, and its achievements in promoting
sports. (para 20)
The Committee also recommends that once a sportsperson is selected for financial
support under NSDF or by the PSB/PSU/organizations, that financial support should continue
till the time the sportsperson attains a certain level. There should be no break in the
financial support to a sportsperson as the same could lead him/her to drop out of the sports.
Thus, financial support should be on continuous “basis. (para 21)
Inclusion of NSDF in Schedule VII of the Companies Act
The Committee notes that another suggestion put forth by the stakeholders was that
NSDF should be included in schedule VII of the Companies Act. The Committee
recommends that the Companies Act should be amended accordingly, once it is included in
schedule VII, not only the government sector companies/PSUs but also private companies
will start making contributions to this Fund. This will certainly ensure continuous and
consistent fund flow to NSDF. (Para 22)
The Committee further feels that the Public Sector Banks while contributing
their funds for the promotion of sports may bifurcate their contribution in two
segments. They can contribute to the National Sports Development Fund and at the
same time can approach schools/colleges in rural areas and, if possible, adopt one of
the sports by investing in infrastructure and other sports facility in the schools/
colleges in the rural areas. (Para 23)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that this contribution to NSDF for
promotion of any recognized sports, sports academy/a group of elite athletes may be
allowed and specifically mentioned as permissible activity for CSR contribution to ‘Funds’
specified in Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2013. In view of poor upkeep
maintenance of our SAI Centres and need for modern equipments/facilities in them, the
contribution to SAI for construction repair, modernization of sports infrastructure/
operation such as talent search and development; national/regional competitions
maintenance with respect to its regional centres, $TCs, SAG Centres, NSAs may be
specifically mentioned in permissible CSR expenditure under CSR Rules by issuing a

25
circular from the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. The Department of Sports may follow this
up with the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. Further, the Committee feels that mandatory
CSR provision need to be made applicable with respect to Insurance and Banking Sector as
well as Companies Act does not cover them. (Para 24)
The Committee also recommends that a certain percentage of Education Cess may be
earmarked for sports promotion as it is our integral part of education as per the Education
Policy. This could be around 0.25 percent for sports leaving 2.75 percent for education. The
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports may follow it up with the Ministry of HRD and
Ministry of Finance for this purpose. (para 25)
Wider Representation in Council and Executive Committee of the National Sports
Development Fund
For the management and administration of NSDF, a council is constituted by the
Central Government. This council has representation from the Ministry of Youth Affairs
and Sports, SAI and eminent sportspersons representing corporate sector, private
foundations and non-profit voluntary organizations. The Committee feels that if the
Department of Sports expects adequate funding from the Public Sector Banks and Public
Sector Undertakings, it should give adequate representation to the other concerned
Ministries and organizations on the council. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that
4-5 PSUs/Banks/Private bodies/Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Department of Financial
Services and Department of Public Enterprises should be given representation in the
council. Similarly, day to day working of the Fund is managed by an Executive Committee
which have representation from the Ministries of Youth Affairs and Sports and Human
Resource Development only. The Committee feels that the Executive Committee should
also have wide representations for managing the day to day working of the Fund.
Accordingly 4-5 PSUs/Banks/Private bodies/Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Department of
Financial Services and Department of Public Enterprises should be given representation in
the Executive Committee also. (Para 26)
The Committee also takes this opportunity to point out that the scheme of NSDF was
framed in the year 1998. At that time, Youth Affairs and Sports was one of the Department
under the Ministry of Human Resource Development. This explains the presence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development in the composition of the
council and the Executive Committee. Now that the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports
has become a full fledged Ministry, the presence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Human Resource Development seems to be inconsistent in the scheme. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports to relook into the
provision and amend it accordingly. (Para 27)
II
RECRUITMENT AND PROMOTION OF SPORTSPERSONS
DoPT Circulars on Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons
The Committee feels that both recruitments and promotions of sportspersons were
not being given due importance. Current guidelines prescribe that Boards of Banks/PSUs
and other organizations set aside upto 5 percent of posts to be filled by sportspersons. In

26
the absence of mandatory minimum cap, the banks/PSUs and other organizations have been
recruiting sportspersons in varying percentage. This is creating confusion. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that DoPT should make at compulsory for all the Ministries/
Departments to recruit 5 percent sportspersons. The Committee would further appreciate if
DoPT gives clear instructions to all the Ministries/Departments/organizations to effectively
implement its promotion policy for the sports persons. The Committee further observes as
follows:-
(i) Job reservation for Sportspersons may be made mandatory in Central
Government, its subordinate officers and undertaking including banks and
insurance companies;
(ii) 2 percent vertical and 3 percent horizontal reservation may be made mandatory
in case of shortfall in vertical reservation due to 50 percent limit getting
breached, it should automatically get transfer to horizontal reservation;
(iii) In pay band II and III reservation for sports person may also be allowed for
Olympic medalist and equivalent; and
(iv) SAI can function as nodal agency and work as employment exchange for
recruitment of sportspersons.   (Para 59)
It has been learnt from the representation of Anju Bobby George that DoPT circular
dated 26 th July, 2012 was being restricted to the appoints from 2012 onwards when the
guidelines were re-issued and provision of three out of turn of promotions was made. The
Committee recommends that this circular should be construed as a guideline by all the
departments and they should have liberal interpretation and should not restrict it and
implement it from prospective date. This is clarificatory guideline and must be applicable in
case of all existing players. Hence, the Committee directs the Department of Customs and
other Departments that if the existing players have not been given out of turn promotions
in their career, they must be considered for three out of turn promotions in phased manner
making the post personal in case the player/employee has won medals in the /international
sporting events during the course of employment even before 2011. Such players should not
be counted as normal department employees and parity should not be drawn with regular
employees. These players are ambassadors and pride of concerned organization who are
considered as role model. The Committee also appreciated Department of Customs for
recruiting and retaining such world class players. The Department should handle such
players with care, dignity and respect and encourage them to provide guidance, coaching and
lecture to youngsters in schools and colleges and in the sporting complexes. They should
also be encouraged to establish own academies/coaching centres or associate themselves with
SAI or Ministry of Sports for sporting activities like coordination and motivation etc. The
Department may also come forward in establishing academies or adopting some coaching
centres where their talent could be utilized. (Para 60)
The Committee noted that most of the sports persons were being recruited in pay
bands I and II jobs only. The Committee feels that this practice should be rectified. A
player gives, the most productive years of his life to sports. Therefore while recruiting
these sportspersons they should be treated at par with pay band III officers based on their
sports ac hievements at National and International level. The Committee would appreciate if
this aspect is also considered by the DoPT in right earnest. (Para 62)

27
III
OTHER IMPORTANT ISSUES
The Committee recommends that SAI and the Department of Sports should give
funds for proper maintenance of the sports facilities at SAI centres in India. The
Department of Sports should also ask the PSUs, PSBs and other organizations to adopt one
of the sports disciplines and improve the facilities at the SAI centre. (Para 66)
Representation of Sportspersons in SAI
The Committee in its 34th Report on the India’s Performance in International
Sports in 1995 had made the following observations on the restructuring of Sports
Authority of India (SAI):--
‘one of the general complaints received by the Committee was that the sports
administrators, particularly most of the officials of the Sports Authority of India (SAI)
had no sports background. It was cited as one of the reasons for lack of direction in the
sports arena.’
‘the Committtee observed that there was a lot of dissatisfaction about the structure and
functioning of the Sports Authority of India (SAI). It was complained that SAI had
become a huge and unwieldy organization, with completely bureaucratic characteristics.
There are a number of Directors, Deputy Directors and other paraphernalia which was
not originally contemplated. There are a number of square pegs in the round holes.
It is a sort of inverted pyramid. All the powers are centralized at the headquarters. The
Regional Centres some of which like the Bangalore one-doing excellent work-are
deprived of financial powers due to lack of autonomy. Even for small matters, they
have to get clearance from the headquarters of SAI at Delhi, including sanctioning of
small expenditure. The Committee found that such a bureaucratic functioning of the
SAI is proving to be a major obstacle in the free and smooth functioning of the
Regional Centres. The Committee feels that the Regional Centres should be delegated
adequate financial and administrative powers so as to cater to their day-to-day
requirements for the efficient and smooth functioning of these Centres. The
atmosphere in SAI needs to be made a sports-friendly rather than the existing
monolithic bureaucratic organization. The Committee feels that unless these Centres
are strengthened, we cannot expect better results from them. Work and accounts of the
Centres should be periodically audited and monitored by the competent authority. The
SAI in Delhi could be just a coordinating authority and should concentrate on policy,
planning and monitoring. There should be a Sub-Regional Centre of SAI in each State,
with a Director in charge of it’. (Para 68)
The Committee finds that there has been no change in the situation till now. The
Sports Authority of India continues to function in the same bureaucratic manner.
Surprisingly, sports persons were not being represented at any level in the functioning of
SAI even today. Many of the Sports Institutes are headed or managed by persons not
having any sports background. The Committee feels, the situation requires immediate
corrective steps. (Para 69)
Involvement of sportspersons in the functioning of SAI could go a long way in
creating good infrastructure and sports facilities at every level as the sportspersons are

28
familiar with the kind of facilities infrastructure coaching, diet, training and support service
are required for the sportspersons. (Para 70)
The Committee further notes that there were nine regional centres of SAI
functioning at Bengaluru, Kolkata, Gandhinagar, Bhopal, Sonepat, Chandigarh, Lucknow,
Imphal and Guwahati. The Committee desires that each one of the Regional Centres should
be headed by a Regional Director with full powers are or two executive Directors in Delhi
could look after the administrative and coordinating works of the organization as well as
matters relating to the teams. A full time Chairman-cum-managing Director with good
sports background should be appointed as the Director-General of SAI. (Para 71)
Engagement of Retired Sportspersons as Coaches
The Committee was informed that there is lack of good coaches for giving training
to juniors in the SAI centres. The Committee feels that there have been many outstanding
sports persons who had retired from active sports and can work as coaches. The Committee
feels that such sportspersons with their experience and expertise could nurture and bring
up a new generation of sports persons besides providing much needed financial help to
retired sportsperson. (Para 72)
While deliberating on the subject it was brought to the notice of the Committee that
BCCI was giving pension to its retired cricketers. The Committee feels that SAI should also
devise a mechanism to provide pension to the sportspersons from NSDF after they retire
from active sports life. This would serve as a social security for the sports person and they
would be able to level their life independently and with dignity. (Para 73)
Sportspersons not to be Engaged in Day to Day Administrative Work
The Committee took serious note of the fact that organisations/departments, which
are recruiting sportsperson, engage them in day to day administrative work of the
organisation. The Committee feels that recruitment of a  sportsperson in an organisation
is a value addition to that organisation and instead of engaging him/her in Administrative
Work, he/she should be given opportunity to excel in the sports and also to train and
mentor junior sports persons. (Para 75)
Equal Remunerations for Coaches
The Committee was also given to understand that the foreign coaches engaged
by various bodies/organisations were being paid higher remuneration vis-a-vis the
Indian coaches. The Committee feels that this practice is uncalled for if we desire to
promote sports in the country. The Committee would appreciate if grading of coaches
is done and equal and uniform remuneration is paid to both foreign and Indian
coaches. (Para 79)

29
MINUTES

XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the
17th July, 2015 in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
4. Shri Basawaraj Pattil
5. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa
 6. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
8. Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha
9. Prof. Chintamani Malviya
10. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
11. Shri Hari Om Pandey
12. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
13. Shri N.K. Premachandran
14. Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran
15. Dr. Nepal Singh
16. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
17. Shri P.R. Sundaram
18. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh Joint Director
Shri Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
31

32
WITNESSES
(I) Department of Financial Services
1. Shri Hasmukh Adhia, Secretary
2. Shrimati Snehlata Srivastava, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Mohammad Mustafa, Joint Secretary
4. Shri K. Unnikrishnan, Dy. CEO, IBA
(II) Ministry of Corporate Affairs
1. Shri Pritam Singh, Additional Secretary
2. Shrimati Sibani Swain, Economic Adviser
(III) Department of Public Enterprises -
1. Shri Ameising Luikham, Secretary
2. Dr. Madhukar Gupta, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Rajesh Kumar Chaudhry, Joint Secretary
4. Shri J N Prasad, Director
(IV) Department of Sports
1. Shri Ajit M. Sharan, Secretary
2. Shri Onkar Kedia, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Vivek Narayan, Director
4. Shri Sagar Preet Hooda, Director
(V) Sports Authority of India
1. Shri Injeti Srinivas, Director General
2. Shri S.C. Sharma, Director (Coord.)
(VI) Department of Personnel and Training
1. Shri Sanjay Kothari, Secretary
2. Ms. Mamta Kundra, Joint Secretary
(VII) Department of School Education and Literacy
1. Shri Subhas Chandra Khuntia, Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) Satbir Bedi, Joint Secretary
3. Shri D.K.D Rao, Deputy Secretary
(VIII) Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan-
1. Shri Santosh Kumar Mall, Commissioner
2. Shri G.K. Srivastava, Additional Commissioner (Admn.)
3. Shri S. Vijaya Kumar, Joint Commissioner (Admn.)
4. Dr. E. Prabhakar, Joint Commissioner (Pers.)

33
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the Secretaries, Department of Financial Services, Department of Public
Enterprises, Department of Personnel and Training and Department of Sports along with
Director General, Sports Authority of India and Additional Secretary, Ministry of Corporate of
Affairs, on the Promotion of Sports and Recruitment of Sportspersons in Central Public Sector
Undertakings and Public Sector Banks.
3. The Secretary, Department of Sports, submitted before the Committee that additional
resources are required for creating more job opportunities for sportspersons. Sports being a
State subject, the grass-root developmental works are only done by the State Government.
Nevertheless, Sports Authority of India, Department of Sports along with National Sports
Federations play important roles in national team selection, customized coaching, international
events participation, etc. He explained that the National Sports Development Fund was
created from contributions from different corporate sectors which are given 100 per cent tax
exemption. The major contributors to this fund are BCCI, Jaiprakash Industries and India
Infrastructure Finance Corporation Limited. To solicit contributions from corporate sector,
the Department of Sports has developed different structures, some of which are direct
contribution to the National Sports Development Fund, adoption of a particular game,
adoption of a particular athlete, etc. Target Olympic Podium is a new scheme introduced by
Department of Sports where top athletes, who are likely medal prospects in the forthcoming
2016 and 2020 Olympic Games, are identified and supported. The funds for this Scheme are
totally borne out of National Sports Development Fund. Regarding the issue of providing
more career opportunities to the athletes, the Department of Personnel and Training has
formulated a policy where upto 5 per cent of the positions can be taken out of the purview
of normal selection boards and be filled up by sportspersons. The major recruiters of
sportspersons are Railways, Defence Services, ONGC and Oil Companies. However, many
other Public Sector Undertakings have a long way to go in recruiting sportspersons.
Therefore, there is a need for formulating a policy for employment of sportspersons in
Public Sector Undertakings and Public Sector Enterprises. He submitted that there is also a
need to work out a policy as to how the sporting talent of sportspersons can be further
utilised in sports once their active playing career is over, as most of the sportspersons, after
recruitment, are totally disconnected or disassociated with the game that they have played all
their lives and because of which they have been recruited.
4. The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, submitted that the activities
included in Corporate Social Responsibility are decided by the Company’s Board and the
Government of India does not have any say beyond a certain limit. A high level committee has
been constituted to monitor the contributions made by various private organizations and Public
Sector Undertakings under Corporate Social Responsibility and the report of this committee is
expected at the end of August, 2015. He informed that under the new Companies Act, the
companies with `1000 crores of turn over or above or `500 crores of net worth or above or
`5 crores of profits or above have to spend 2 per cent of their average net profit in the
preceding three financial years on CSR activities. He pointed out that National Sports
Development Fund has not been included in Schedule VII of the Companies Act but sports, in
general, have been mentioned.
5. The Secretary, Department of Financial Services, pointed out that as banks are not
registered under the Companies Act, it is not mandatory for them to contribute under Corporate
Social Responsibility. He pointed out that, so far, 1903 state level and national level players
have been recruited in various Public Sector Enterprises, not only in clerical cadres, but also

34
in officer cadres. The Bank which recruited the highest number of sportspersons is State Bank
of India, having recruited 420 sportspersons, the other banks are Vijaya Bank, Syndicate Bank,
Central Bank of India, Bank of India etc.
6. The Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises submitted that there was a policy for
recruiting sportspersons since 1984. However, the Department of Public enterprises, in 1997,
suspended many guidelines and among them were the guidelines for recruitment of
sportspersons. He apprised the Committee that, in consultation with the Department of
Personnel and Training, he would examine if there is a need for the said guideline to be
circulated again. He explained that Corporate Social Responsibility is under Schedule VII of the
Rules as notified by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs which contains five funds, of which four
of them are Fund for Swachh Bharat Kosh; Fund for Clean Ganga; Fund for Prime Minister’s
National Relief and Fund for Technological Incubation in Academic Institutions. However,
National Sports Development Fund is not included in that Schedule. He submitted that he would
take up the matter for inclusion of National Sports Development Fund in the Schedule VII with
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
7. The Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training, submitted that since 1984,
they have issued a guideline whereby upto 5 per cent seats of group ‘c’ and ‘D’ jobs may
be reserved for sportspersons. However, this guideline was withdrawn. He apprised the
Committee that efforts will be made to re-issue this guideline in all Public Sector
Undertakings. He also pointed out that another guideline was framed wherein
sportspersons, who won medals in Olympic Games, Commonwealth Games, Asian Games
and World Championships, would be given out of turn promotion. He iterated that these
guidelines must be applied in the most transparent manner so that deserving candidates get
these opportunities. A policy was also framed that sportspersons, who are recruited in
various Public Sector Undertakings, must be allowed to play until their sporting careers are
over.
8. The Chairman and Members raised queries which were replied to by the Witnesses.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
9. The Committee, then, interacted with the Secretary, Department of School Education
and Literacy and Commissioner, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan on the transfer and promotion
policy in respect of teaching staff in Kendriya Vidyalayas. The Chairman and Members raised
queries which were replied to by the Secretary and the Commissioner. The Committee was
assured that the promotion policy for the post of Vice-Principal would be reconsidered and the
Committee would be apprised of the same within a month.
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
11. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.

35
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the
10th August, 2015 in Room No. 67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
3. Shri Basawaraj Patil
4. Shri Sharad Pawar
LOKSABHA
5. Shri C.R. Chaudhary
6. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
7. Shri Hari Om Pandey
8. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
9. Shri N.K. Premachandran
10. Shri Sumedanand Saraswati
11. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
12. Shri P.R. Sundaram
SECRETARIAT
Shri R.B. Gupta, Joint Secretary
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh , Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to consider and adopt the draft 270
th Report on the Performance of National Sports
Development Fund and Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons (Part I).
3. The Committee considered the draft 270th Report on the Performance of National Sports
Development Fund and Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons (Part I) and adopted the same
after some discussion.
4. The Committee, then, decided to present/lay the above mentioned Report in both the Houses
of Parliament on 13th August, 2015. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence,
Shri Basawaraj Patil, M.P., Rajya Sabha to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Bhagirath
Prasad, M.P., Lok Sabha and in his absence, Shri Sumedanand Saraswati, M.P., Lok .Sabha to lay
the Report in the Lok Sabha.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 10.40 
A.M.
35

ANNEXURE

LIST OF WITNESSES
1. Shri P. Gopichand, Sportspersons
2. Shrimati Ashwini Nachappa, Sportspersons
3. Shri Viren Rasquina, Sportspersons
4. Smt. Anjali Bhagwat, Sportspersons
5. Shrimati Anju Bobby George, Sportspersons
6. Allahabad Bamk
7. Bank of India
8. State Bank of India
9. Union Bank of India
10. United Commercial Bank
11. Central Bank of India
12. IDBI Bank
13. Bank of Maharashtra
14. Bank of Baroda
15. Dena Bank
16. Canara Bank
17. State Bank of Mysore
18. Vijaya Bank
19. Syndicate Bank
20. Corporation Bank
21. Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd.
22. Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
23. Coal India Limited
24. Damodar Valley Corporation
25. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited
26. Indian Oil Corporation
27. Life Insurance Corporation of India
28. Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited
39

40
29. Steel Authority of India
30. Air India
31. Bharat Earth Movers Limited
32. Bharat Electronics Limited
33. Gas Authority of India Limited
34. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.