PARLIAMENT 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
March 
TWO HUNDRED 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED 
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 
OF MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT  OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL OPMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March , 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY FIFTH  REPORT 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 -2016 (DEMAND NO. 108 
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 16 th  March, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16 th  March, 2016) 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO. 
275  
REPORT  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
REPORT ON  
2016 (DEMAND NO. 108 )  
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT  

PARLIAMENT 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED 
 DEMANDS FO R GRANTS 2015 
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
March 
 
 
PARLIAMENT  OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL OPMENT  
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT ON 
R GRANTS 2015 -2016 (DEMAND NO. 1 0
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 16 th  March, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16 th  March, 2016) 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March , 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka) 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
REPORT ON  
08)  
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT  

C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …........................................................... (i)-( ii)   
2.        PREFACE.................................................................................................................. (iii) 
3.  ABBREVIATIONS.................................................................................................... (iv) 
4.  REPORT............................................ .............................................…............................  
Chapter-I  -   Recommendations/Observations which h ave been accepted  
 by the Government ...................................................................  
Chapter -II  -  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply.............  
Chapter-III -  Recommendations/Observations in resp ect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee...  
Chapter-IV -  Recommendation/Observation in respect  of which reply of the  
Government is still awaited......................................................... 
   
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE    
5. *MINUTES........................................ ................................................................... 
6. *ANNEXURES...................................... ............................................................     
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
*Appended on printing stage 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 31 st  August, 2015) 
 
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya      Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
3. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
4. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
5. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
7. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
8. Shri Sharad Pawar 
9. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa 
10. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat 
12.  Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman 
13.  Shri C.R. Chaudhary 
14.       Shrimati Bhawana Gawali Patil 
15.       Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha 
16 .       Shri  Anant Kumar Hegde 
17.       Prof. Chintamani Malviya 
18.       Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra 
19.       Shri Chand Nath 
20.       Shri Hari Om Pandey 
21.       Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
22.       Shri N.K. Premachandran 
23.       Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
24.       Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran 
25.       Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
26.       Shri M.I. Shanavas 
27.       Dr. Nepal Singh 
28.       Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh 
29.       Shri P.R. Sundaram 
30.       Shri Ajay Tamta 
31.       Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher  
  
 
 
 
 
(i) 

SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director 
Shri R.K. Mecolt Singh, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
  

 
P R E F A C E 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development, having been authorised by the Committe e to present the Report on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Two Hundred Seventy-fifth Repor t on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Sixty-  eighth Report on Demands for Grants 
(Demand No. 108) of the Ministry of Women and Child Development for the year 2015-16.   
 
2. The Two Hundred Sixty- fifth Report of the Departme nt-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Human Resource Development was present ed to Rajya Sabha on 28 th  April, 2015 
and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 28 th  April, 2015.  Replies of the Government to the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Repor t, were considered by the Committee at its 
meeting held on the 14.3.2016. 
 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopt ed the same at its meeting held on 
the 14.3.2016. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
March, 14 2016 
Phalguna 24,1937 (Saka) 
 
 
DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

ABBREVIATIONS  
 
1. AGs:  Adolescent Girls 
2. AKBY: Anganwadi Karyakartri Bima Yojana 
3. APL:  Above Poverty Line 
4. ARSH:  Adolescent, Reproductive and Sexual Health 
5. AWCs: Anganwadi Centres 
6. AWHs: Anganwadi Helpers 
7. AWWs: Anganwadi Workers 
8. BBBP:  Beti Bachao Beti Padhao 
9. BE:  Budget Estimates 
10. BPL:  Below Poverty Line 
11. CARA: Central Adoption Resource Agency 
12. CARINGS: Child Adoption Resource Information and Gu idance System 
13. CCI:  Child Care Institute 
14. CCT:  Conditional Cash Transfer 
15.  CDPO: Child Development Project Officer 
16. CSS:  Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
17. CWC:  Child Welfare Committee 
18. ECCE:  Early Childhood  Care and Education 
19. EFC:  Expenditure Finance Committee 
20. FCI:  Female Critical Illness 
21. ICDS:  Integrated Child Development Services Scheme  
22. ICPS:  Integrated Child Protection Scheme 
23. ICT:  Information and Communication Technology 
24. IDA:  International Development Association 
25. IEC:  Nationwide Information, Education and Communi cation 
26. IGMSY: Indira Gandhi Matritva Shayog Yojana 
27. IMO:  Intermediary Organization 
28. ISAP:  Indian Society for Agri-business Professiona ls, New Delhi 
29. JJ Act:  Juvenile Justice Act 

30. JJB:  Juvenile Justice Board 
31. MIS:  Management Information System 
32. MoU:  Memorandum of Understanding 
33. MSY:  Matritva Sahyog Yojana 
34. MWCD: Ministry of Women and Child Development 
35. NCAER: National Council for Applied Economic Resear ch 
36. NCW:  National Commission for Women North Eastern R egion 
37. NER:  North Eastern Region 
38. NGO:  Non Governmental Organization  
39. NIPCCD: National Institute of Public Cooperation an d Child Development 
40. NMEW: National Mission for Empowerment of Women 
41. NNM:  National Nutrition Mission 
42. NRCW: National Resource Centre for Women 
43. PAB:  Project Approval Board 
44. P&L:  Pregnant & Lactating 
45. PSE:  Pre-School Education 
46. RE:  Revised Estimates 
47. RGSEAG: Rajiv Gandhi Scheme for Empowerment of Adol escent Girls 
48. RMK:  Rashtriya Mahikla Kosh 
49. RTE:  Right to Education 
50. SAA:  Specialized Adoption Agency 
51. SARA:  State Adoption Resource Agency 
52. SHG:  Self Help Group 
53. SMC:  School Management Group 
54. SRCW: State Resource Centre for Women 
55. STEP:  Support to Training and Employment Programme  
56. UC:  Utilization Certificate 
57. VCFS:  Village Convergence and Facilitation Service  
58. WWH:  Working Women Hostel  
  

REPORT 
 
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development deals with the action taken by  the Government on the recommendations 
contained in its Two hundred sixty-eighth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 108) of the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development for the year 2015-16. 
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations 
contained in the 268th  Report have been categorized as follows: 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations which have been a ccepted by the Government – 
paras –2.9, 2.12, 4.7, 5.4, 6.3, 7.9, 9.4, 12.3 
 (Chapter-I) Total – 8 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committ ee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply – paras –3.3, 4.19, 5.17, 10.6, 13.3, 14.5, 15.7, 17.3 
 (Chapter-II) Total – 8 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee – paras – 2 .3, 2.5, 2.7, 2.11, 4.5, 4.13, 
4.16, 4.21, 4.24, 4.26, 4.28, 8.6, 10.4, 11.4, 15.9, 16.2, 17.4 18.1 
 (Chapter-III) Total – 18 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of whi ch replies of the Government are 
still awaited - paras- 7.6 
 (Chapter-IV) Total - 1 
  

CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
GOVERNMENT 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
2.9 The Committee finds that the performance of the  Scheme like SABLA has been 
satisfactory, however for the IGMSY Scheme, the phy sical targets remained under-achieved in 
2013-14 and 2014-15.  Schemes related for girl chil d, adolescent girls and women are of vital 
importance, so any problems faced in the achievemen t of targets need to be identified and 
addressed for the efficacious implementation of the schemes.  
Action Taken 
 
The Indira Gandhi Matritva Sahyog Yojana (IGMSY) wa s introduced in 2010-11. A 
baseline survey was conducted by the State Governme nts/UT Administrations at the outset of the 
scheme. The Ministry compiled the number of benefic iaries received from the States/UTs, which 
came out to be 12.5 lakh. The Ministry had undertak en several rounds of review meetings with the 
State Governments/UT Administrations to identify th e reasons for slow pace of implementation of 
scheme. During these interactions, it was realised that some States/UTs have overestimated the 
number of beneficiaries during the baseline survey.  The State Governments/UT Administrations 
were requested to re-estimate the number of benefic iaries which was further reported to be around 
10 lakh annually. For the financial year 2015-16, t he estimated number of beneficiaries remain 
same. The beneficiary coverage reported by the States/UTs has substantially increased from 259 in 
2010-11 to 5.9 lakh and 4.65 lakh in 2013-14 and 20 14-15 (annual reports awaited from 18 
States/UTs) respectively. Performance of the scheme  Sabla has been satisfactory as observed by 
the Committee. Needs no comments. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
2.12 It has been brought to the attention of the Co mmittee that no internal audit of the Ministry 
has been conducted after 2007.  The Committee is co nstrained to observe that for such an 
important Ministry catering to about 70 per cent of  the population, a systematic and regular 
mechanism for auditing is not put in place.  The Co mmittee would like to point out that internal 
auditing is necessary to add value and improve an o rganization’s operations.  So it is hoped that 
internal auditing is done regularly so that the Ministry can accomplish its objectives.  
 
Action Taken 
 
An O.M. dated 12.06.2015 has been issued to CCA, HR D for conducting Internal Audit of 
this Ministry 
. 
 
 
 

IV. INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES SCHEME (I CDS) 
 
Status of Infrastructure in Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
4.7 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Mi nistry in trying to fulfill its financial and 
physical targets.  However, a lot more can be done to fill the gap in making sanctioned AWCs 
operational. The Committee feels that the constrain ts that develop in the process should be 
identified and taken care of. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Ministry is taking up the matter with States/UTs r egularly to make all sanctioned AWCs 
operational. 
 
V. INTEGRATED CHILD PROTECTION SCHEME (ICPS) 
 
Recommendations/observations 
5.4 The Committee observed from the above table tha t all the States and UTs have signed the 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) under the ICPS Sc heme, the last being Telangana on 20 
th  
October, 2014. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry in its effort to 
implement the Scheme in all the States.  The ICPS S cheme has finally picked up with increasing 
utilization of allocated funds and increasing numbe r of beneficiaries except for the year 2013-14.  
The Committee also notes that there was a sharp decline in allocation for the Scheme as against the 
projected demand.  ICPS is a scheme which is of imm ense importance for the protection of 
children.  For the proper implementation of such an  important scheme, adequate funds should be 
allocated.  The Committee feels that the Ministry s hould approach the Government for allotment 
of enough funds. Also, the States/UTs should devise  an effective and efficient delivery structures 
and recruit enough staffs so that the scheme is imp lemented properly.  The Committee believes 
that ICPS is the scheme for spreading a wide protec tive network of structures for helping 
distressed children in need of care.  The Scheme sh ould be taken more seriously and the Ministry 
would have to play a pro-active role in this regard.  The Committee is of the view that the Ministry 
should take the implementation aspect of the scheme  with the State Governments/UTs and 
regularly monitor the progress of the Scheme .  Further, the State Government/UT Administrations 
need to be sensitized and training of staff should be emphasized upon for successful 
implementation of the Scheme.  
 
Action Taken 
 
The allocation of funds to the Ministry and its exp enditure has increased since the 
inception of the scheme since 2009-10 as mentioned in the table below: 
Table-I 
 
Plan/Allocation Year Budget Allocation 
(in Rs. Cr.) 
Amount Sanctioned 
(in Rs. Cr.) 
XI 2009-10 BE - 60 42.63 

Centre: Rs. 1071 cr. 
State: Rs. 269 cr.  
RE - 50 
2010-11 BE – 300 
RE – 100 
115.13 
2011-12 BE – 270 
RE – 213.40 
177.54 
XII 
Centre: Rs. 2350 cr. 
State: Rs. 650 cr.  
2012-13 BE – 400 
RE – 273.20 
259.09 
2013-14 BE – 300 
RE – 270 
265.78 
 2014-15 BE – 400 
RE – 450 
448.23 
 2015-16 
(as on 5/8/15) 
BE – 402.23 123.92 
 
In order to ensure proper implementation of the Sch eme the Ministry has requested the 
States/UTs to timely submit their financial proposa l along with implementation plan for seeking 
grants under ICPS. These proposals are scrutinized,  reviewed along with the progress of 
implementation of the scheme by the Project Approva l Board (PAB) constituted at the Ministry. 
The number of meetings of the PAB held during 2013- 14 was 24, in 2014-15 it increased to 33, 
thereby indicating the Scheme is being implemented progressively in 33 States/UTs. The amount 
sanctioned to States/UTs during the year 2013-14 is  Rs. 265.78 crore and in 2014-15 it increased 
to Rs. 448.43 crore. During the last 3 years 2012-1 3, 2013-14 and 2014-15 the average grant 
released works out to Rs. 324.44 crore the BE for I CPS for financial year 2015-16 is Rs. 402.23 
crore. The Shortfall of Rs. 275 crore has been requ ested in the Revised Estimates (RE). The States 
/UTs have also been requested by the Ministry to re cruit staff in prescribed strength at the Service 
delivery structures that are set up at the State an d District level namely the State Child Protection 
Societies (SCPS) and State Adoption Resource Agencies (SARA) and the District Child Protection 
Units. At present 34 SCPS, 32 SARA and 640 DCPUs ha ve been set up. Similarly the States/UTs 
are requested to appoint requisite staff for care s upport and rehabilitation services at various kinds  
of child care Institutions and at the Statutory bod ies such as the CWCs and JJBs. At present the 
status of services and structures is given below: 
                                                                                        Table-II 
 
S. No. HEAD NUMBERS 
(States/UTs/Districts) 
1 MOU 36 
SERVICE DELIVERY STRUCTURES 
2 SCPS 34 
3 SPSU 32 
4 SARA 32 
5 DCPU 640 
STATUTORY BODIES 
6 CWC 643 
7 JJB 642 
CARE, SUPPORT AND REHABILITATION SERVICES 
8 HOMES 1521 
9 Childline services 346 

10 Open Shelters 299 
11 Specialised Adoption 
Agencies (SAA) 
320 
 
State wise Staff strength at these service delivery  structures, statutory bodies and various 
types of Homes, Open Shelters, SAAs is given in Annexure.   
 
VI. BETI  BACHAO BETI PADHAO (BBBP) PROGRAMME 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
6.3   The Committee observes that the steadily decl ining child sex ratio in India has reached 
emergency proportions and urgent action must be tak en to alleviate this crisis. The Committee 
further observes that this decline has taken place despite the best efforts by the Ministry in 
checking this trend. It should be noted that girl c hild is the future of every nation and India is no 
exception.  In a society, both girls and boys, play  equally important roles.  To eliminate girl child 
from the society is a step backward, away from the civilized society.  So, for the society and the 
nation as a whole to grow and progress, the girl ch ild must be saved, cared, nurtured and loved. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Minis try should make all out efforts to check this 
declining CSR in a mission mode and also to put mor e aggressiveness, energy and resources to 
reverse this trend. 
 
Action Taken 
The observation of committee has been noted for compliance.  
 
Under the Beti Bachao Beti Padhao (BBBP) Scheme mul ti-sectoral action in selected 100 
districts (low on CSR) is being carried out to impr ove the declining child sex ratio (0-6 year). In 
addition to above a Nation-wide awareness and advoc acy campaign o change the mindset through 
training sensitization, awareness raising and commu nity mobilization on ground are being carried 
out . 
 
VII.   RAJIV GANDHI SCHEME FOR EMPOWERMENT OF ADOLE SCENT GIRLS 
(RGSEAG)-SABLA 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
7.9 The Committee is happy to note that the scheme for the empowerment of adolescent is 
yielding good results. The nutrition aspect of the scheme has started off quite well, however, a lot 
more effort should be put in for the non-nutrition aspect.  The Committee is of the view that the 
non nutrition component of the scheme is very impor tant for the development and empowerment 
of adolescent girls.  This component would help the  adolescent girls to upgrade their home-based 
skills, including vocational skills.  The Committee  hopes that this component would be 
strengthened so as to benefit maximum number of ado lescent girls. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry should ensure full utilization of funds which are having used for girl 
child in backward regions for realizing its full potential. 
  

Action Taken 
 
The observation of the committee has been noted. In  this context, it is mentioned that the 
evaluation of the scheme Sabla has also brought out the inadequacy of budgetary pr ovisions for 
non nutrition and the need for effective convergenc e upto the grass root level and flexibility in the 
scheme to address local needs of AGs. Efforts are b eing made to strengthen the convergence under 
the scheme. The financial norms under the scheme ha ve been proposed to be revised in addition to 
the provision for flexibility in the scheme to addr ess local needs of AGs. The observation of the 
committee regarding full utilization of funds has b een noted and efforts will be made by the 
Ministry to ensure full utilization of funds under the scheme. 
 
[ 
IX. CENTRAL ADOPTION RESOURCE AGENCY (CARA) 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
9.4 The Committee takes note of the measures taken by CARA for the sensitization of the 
stakeholders involved directly or indirectly for the protection and rehabilitation of children without 
parental care in alternate families.  The Committee  has been given to understand that a number of 
capacity building programmes have been conducted by  CARA for the various stakeholders at the 
State level to sensitize them on the advantages of early rehabilitation and integration of the child 
into a CARINGS (Child Adoption Resource Information  & Guidance System) - an IT application 
introduced by CARA for greater transparency in the adoption system.  Continuous promotional 
efforts and enhanced coordination between Governmen t and adoption agencies have led to a better 
reporting system.  In order to orient the functiona ries of adoption agencies and stakeholders on 
new adoption guidelines (2011), CARA has organized several training and development activities.  
Such programmes enabled CARA to map the expectation s of the stakeholders of the adoption 
programme and identify areas which needed special i ntervention. The Committee notes that 
CARA would achieve the objectives by providing alternate homes for the needy children in a more 
better manner. 
 
Action Taken 
 
CARA has organized several training and development  activities including multi media 
campaign to promote legal adoption in the country. Further, it is important to mention here about 
New Adoption guidelines (2015 ) notified by Government of India and upgraded CARING S. w.e.f. 
1st August, 2015. 
 
a. Guidelines Governing Adoption of Children – 2015 
 
Guidelines Governing Adoption of Children -2015 notified on 17th July 2015 and effective 
from 1 
st  August, 2015 recognizes the fact that there is a f amily for every child which means if a 
child is unable to get a family within the country (within the State or in a different State), can be 
placed in inter country adoption as early de-instit utionalization of a child and his/her placement in 
a loving family is paramount. This has replaced the  2011 Adoption Guidelines. The Guidelines 
envisage simplification of adoption procedure and a lso addresses delay in the adoption system. 
Transparency, ethical practices and a strict timeli ne in the adoption process are essentials parts of 
the new Guidelines. There is more emphasis of invol vement of local authority like District Child 

Protection Unit (DCPU) to facilitate adoption etc. Now all recognized adoption agencies will be 
known as Specialized Adoption Agencies and such agencies shall be entitled to place children both 
in-country and inter-country  adoptions. 
 
b. CARINGS (Child Adoption Resource Information & G uidance System): An e-governance 
Initiative 
 
The upgraded IT application has emphasized on e–gov ernance in adoption system - from 
partial online system to complete online system. In  fact, within the country eligible and suitable 
Prospective Adoptive Parents (PAPs) can access prof ile of adoptable children and go for online 
matching. Priority to domestic adoption is ensured through online system. In cases of inter-country 
adoption, once prospective parents are considered e ligible and suitable by CARA, online matching 
is possible through the sponsoring foreign agency o r authority. In cases of all adoptable children, 
relevant information are captured in the CARINGS be ginning from their admission till the child 
gets adoption decree and post adoption follow–up for a period of two years. 
 
 
XII.    SWADHAR GREH 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
12.3  The Committee feels that Swadhar Greh is also  an important Scheme laid out to provide 
help to victims in unfortunate circumstances and th is Scheme should be implemented with all 
sincerity. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Ministry of Women and Child Development has impleme nted a new scheme viz., Swadhar 
Greha scheme that caters to primary needs of women in difficult circumstances merging two 
schemes Swadhar and Short is a Central Sector Schem e implemented through States/UT 
Administrations with 100% central funding. State Go vernments have been requested for quality 
implementation of the programme after due verificat ion of the implementing agencies. Necessary 
funds are being transferred to the States/UTs. 
 
  

CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
III.  HIGHLIGHTS OF WORKING GROUP REPORT ON CHILD R IGHTS 
Recommendations/observations 
 
3.3   Keeping in view of the present position of ch ildren in the country, the Committee believes 
that efforts are required to ensure that resources are judiciously utilized towards implementing new 
schemes and that right preparations should be made for a better and efficient implementation of 
these Schemes.  There is a need for efforts to prov ide flexibility of norms to address critical needs 
at the community level by creating a flexi-pool of resources and the need for funding schemes with 
realistic cost norms.  Policy formulation, strength ening programmes execution, enforcement of 
laws, plan implementation, capacity-building and sc heme monitoring are some of the areas that 
need immediate attention and strengthening.  Conver gence between various sectoral policies and 
programmes that impact the lives of children and in ter-sectoral coordination are vital for bridging 
the shortfalls in achievements. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The observations are noted by the Ministry for com pliance. 
IV. INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES SCHEME (I CDS) 
Recommendations/observations 
4.19 The Committee would like to point out the impo rtance of the PSE and Medicine kits in 
AWCs which introduce the young children to non-form al pre-school education through a variety 
of activities and teaching and provide them medical  aid whenever required during their stay in an 
AWC. It was also to facilitate the transition of th e pre-school children in AWCs to the primary 
school. The Committee desires that proper care and attention may be shown while implementing 
the Schemes. 
Action Taken  
[ 
The Hon‘ble Committee‘s observations have been noted for compliance. 
 
V. INTEGRATED CHILD PROTECTION SCHEME (ICPS) 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
5.17  The Committee would like to express its satis faction over the various steps taken to 
deal with the issue of sexual abuse of children.  T he Committee welcomes the positive steps taken 
by the Ministry in coordination with other concerne d agencies and the State Governments/UT 
Administrations.  The need of the hour is the prope r implementation of the various provisions laid 
down in the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection o f Children) Act, 2000.  It is also important that 
the States/UTs make an effort to implement the Act to punish the perpetrators and also to prevent 
further committing of crimes.  Moreover, the Commit tee feels that public at large needs to be 

made aware of these legal provisions and facilities  available to the victims so that committing of 
any such crimes be prevented and justice be served.  
 
Action Taken 
The Ministry is implementing the Centrally sponsore d Integrated Child Protection Scheme 
since 2009 to effectively implement the Juvenile Ju stice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 
2000. Under the Scheme, financial assistance is pro vided to States and UTs for establishing the 
statutory structures and provide services envisaged  under the JJ Act. The Act and the Scheme is 
being implemented across the country.  
 
To address sexual abuse of children, the Protection  of Children from Sexual Offences Act 
was enacted in 2012, which provides for stringent p unishment based on the gravity of the offence. 
Section 43 of the Act lays duty on the Central and State Government to spread awareness on the 
provisions of the Act including general public and children. In this regard, training and 
sensitization workshops are held with various stake holders such as police, judiciary, civil society 
and others on the various provisions of the JJ Act and the POCSO Act.  
 
Recently, an animated film "Komal" on child sexual abuse was awarded as the Best 
Educational Film in the National Film Awards, 2015.  The Film has been made by Child line India 
Foundation, an organization fully supported by the MWCD. This film has been circulated to all 
States/UTs and Ministry of Human Resource Development for circulation to all schools. 
 
X. RASHTRIYA MAHILA KOSH (RMK) 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
10.6   The Committee is happy to note the positive outcomes of the scheme of RMK which has 
led to economic empowerment of poor women in the id entified States as highlighted in the impact 
assessment studies. Not just this, economic empower ment of these women also resulted in 
increasing their self-confidence and awareness and has given them respect and a say in decision 
making leading to their social empowerment.  The Co mmittee believes that in order to sustain and 
increase the reach of the scheme to the targeted wo men, sustained efforts need to be made by the 
Ministry to utilize the allocated funds and closely monitor the progress of the Scheme. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The Committee’s observations have been noted for c ompliance. 
  

XIII.  UJJAWALA SCHEME 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
13.3  The Committee feels that the Ujjawala Scheme  is a valuable step in the direction of 
protecting two vulnerable sections of society-women  and children, from exploitation.  Through 
this scheme, steps should be taken to empower victi ms of trafficking and help them become 
financially independent, thus improving their stand ard of living, health and social status.  It is 
imperative that civil society, non-governmental org anizations should be associated to play a pro-
active role in addressing the complex nature of thi s issue.  The Committee feels that the scheme 
has been very well conceptualized and it should def initely be continued in future as it claims to 
deal with the issue from the grassroots level through prevention. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Hon‘ble Committee‘s observations indicate the factual position. As such, no comments 
are necessary. 
 
XIV.   NATIONAL MISSION FOR THE EMPOWERMENT OF WOMEN (NMEW) 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
14.5   The Committee is of the considered view that  the objective of the 'National Mission for 
Empowerment of Women' is of vital importance as it aims at social, economic and educational 
empowerment of women.  The Committee feels that the  scheme has not taken off properly even 
though five years had passed since the Scheme had b een launched.  The Committee feels that it is 
high time that the objectives of the Mission are ac hieved through its proper implementation.  The 
Committee hopes that all pending procedures for app raisal and approval are completed without 
any delay and that the Scheme starts to function efficiently. 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.  The directions of the Committee are noted for co mpliance. 
 
2.  The revised NMEW Scheme was approved on 12.11.2 014 with an outlay of Rs 225 crore 
for the 12th Plan period. The NMEW Scheme is under implementation. 
 
3.  Ministry of Finance, GOI has communicated the d ecision pertaining to the cost-sharing 
ration between the Center and the State/UT for NMEW  Scheme via OM dated May 28th 2015. As 
per this order, NMEW will be implemented as a central Sector Scheme with 100% central funding. 
 
 
XV.   NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WOMEN (NCW) 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
15.7   The Committee is happy to note that the Comm ission has managed to fulfill most of the 
responsibilities laid down in its mandate.  The dif ferent public hearings, out-reach programme, 

counseling and legal functions have definitely work ed in improving the conditions of the Indian 
woman.  The Committee, having mentioned this, would  like to refer to the rising crimes against 
women which violate the right to life and various f reedoms enjoyed by women citizens of the 
country.  The Committee firmly believes that being the national as well as the nodal body for 
women’s rights, the Commission needs to widen its s cope of activities beyond it present set of 
activities.   Vigorous and concerted efforts need t o be taken by the Commission, especially with 
respect to crimes against women. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The observations of the Committee have been commun icated to NCW for taking necessary 
action. 
 
XVII. GENDER BUDGETING 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
17.3 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry  of Women and Child Development being 
the nodal agency for gender budgeting should focus upon the proper allocation to and full 
utilization of the Gender Budgeting Scheme.  There has been a considerable progress made in this 
area which have concerns across the Ministries both  at the Central and State level from the 
perspective of women specific schemes.  The focus s hould be aimed at strengthening and 
empowering the Gender Budgeting Cells to enable the m to undertake their envisaged role 
effectively. 
 
Action Taken 
 
As far as Gender Budgeting Scheme is concerned, out  of the total allocation of Rs. 1.30 
crore during the year 2014-15, an amount of Rs. 1.1 8 was incurred. During the current year, the 
allocation for the Gender Budgeting Scheme is Rs.2.00 crore out of which an amount of 0.89 crore 
has been spent so far. 
 
 As regards the Gender Budgeting Cells are concerne d, MWCD has been organizing training 
programmes for the officers of GBCs regularly. Thou gh the Ministry does not have mandate to 
monitor the GBCs of Central Ministries/Departments,  the Ministry has been requesting the GBCs 
to have their quarterly meetings regularly and prep are an Annual Action Plan of the GBCs every 
year. Some of the GBCs have already started prepari ng their Annual Action Plan highlighting 
various important activities to be undertaken by th em every year. For the current year, so far nine 
GBCs have submitted their Annual Action Plan. 
  

CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
2.3      The Committee is dismayed to note that there h as been a substantial decrease in 
budgetary allocation in child welfare schemes.  The  same is the case with the schemes related to 
women also. Though the Finance Minister has announced in this year’s budgetary speech (Para 55) 
that extra resources of around Rs. 1500 crores would be provided depending on addition al 
resources.  However, the Ministry seems to have bee n caught unaware about such a massive 
budget cut.  Devolution of funds to the States as p er recommendation of the Fourteenth Finance 
Commission is yet to concretize.  Even if it comes,  the experience with States contributing their 
share had not been very encouraging.  So, with this  budget cut, there is a question mark as to how 
and when these States would contribute remaining pa rt.  Thus, the Ministry has been left in lurch 
affecting the very implementation of the existing Schemes. The Committee, however, recommends 
that all out efforts be made to see that the State Governments contribute their share as soon as 
possible so that the projected targets can be achie ved efficiently and in a timely manner.  The 
Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Fina nce should make Rs.1500 crores as 
promised by the Minister of Finance before Parliame nt at the earliest lest the schemes of the 
Department should suffer. 
Action Taken  
 
For the year 2015-16, Rs.8335.77 Crore has been all ocated for ICDS Scheme at BE stage. 
This allocation is less than 50% of allocation last  year. An additional allocation of Rs.1500 Crore 
is expected to be contributed for ICDS as announced  in Budget Speech 2015-16. The budgetary 
allocations for some Centrally Sponsored Schemes in cluding ICDS were rationalized by the Govt. 
in view of the decision to give a substantially hig her devolution of taxes of 42% to the States. This 
has been done in spirit of Co-operative Federalism whereby both Union and States have to pool 
their resources for achieving common national goals. 
Once a decision on cost sharing ratio under ICDS is  received from Ministry of Finance, a 
letter may be sent to all States/UTs for ensuring c ontribution of State Share under the Scheme. At 
the appropriate time in consultation with Finance D ivision of MWCD the matter will be taken up 
with Ministry of Finance for additional allocation of Rs. 1500 crores for ICDS. 
 As regards contribution of State share, this can b e checked/ensured through statement of 
expenditure which has a column regarding State shar e. ICDS funds are released on reimbursement 
basis. States will get funds if they have spent the ir contribution. The Parliament has approved the 
first batch supplementary 2015-16 in which addition al funds amounting to Rs. 3066/- crore have 
been allocated to Integrated Child Development Services. 
 

Comments of the Committee 
 
 
The Committee observes that the financial year is c oming to a close, yet no concrete 
actions appear to have been taken up. The Committee, accordingly, desires that the details of 
action taken during this period be furnished for it s appraisal. Committee, further, desires 
that the decision of the cost sharing ratio between  the Centre and the States should be taken 
up at the earliest, lest the scheme should suffer. The Committee is of the considered view that 
the Ministry should consult on this issue with the Ministry of Finance so as to ensure that the 
States contribute their matching share. 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
2.5 The Committee observes that in almost all the m ajor schemes, except for only one scheme 
namely, National Commission for Women, BE allocation has been  drastically brought down at the  
RE stage.  Further, it is unfortunate to note that in the major schemes, the funds allocated have not 
been utilized to the fullest extent.  Also in the scheme of National Nutrition Mission, the utilization 
of funds is nil and for the scheme of One Stop Cris is Centre, no fund had been allocated in the RE 
stage in the year 2014-15.  The Committee would lik e to point out that in major schemes like 
ICDS and SABLA, the funds allocated in BE 2015-16 h as been cut to great extent that the 
achieving the physical targets of these schemes mig ht have been affected.  This needs to be 
checked and the Committee desires that a status not e on this be furnished to the Committee for its 
consideration.  
 
Action Taken 
 
BE for the scheme Sabla for 2014-15 was Rs. 700 cro re. At RE stage it was reduced to Rs. 
630 crore. Against which an expenditure of Rs. 625. 10 crore was incurred. Due to reduction at RE 
stage, funds could not be released to some of the S tates. As per the Annual Progress Reports 
(APR) furnished by the States/UTs, excess expenditu re within the financial norms has been 
incurred out of State‘s Budget by eight States viz.  Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Nagaland, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh and a liability of Rs 7743.6 lakh 
was created. 
 
Financial Progress : In 2014-15, against the sum of Rs. 625.10 crore r eleased to States, 
expenditure reported by States as on date is Rs. 59 3.84 crore. The year wise details of funds 
released/utilized during the last three years are as under:- 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Scheme 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Released Expenditure  Released Expenditure  Released Expenditure  
Sabla 
including 
KSY 
503.42 638.49 610.77 674.99 625.10 593.83 
 
Physical Achievements: The beneficiaries covered for nutrition as per repo rts received 
from States during 2014-15 is 100.53 lakh against the target of 1 crore for the year. 
 

Implementation of the scheme in 2015-16: BE for Sabla for 2015-16 is Rs. 75.5 crore. 
Budget Division, Ministry of Finance released Suppl ementary Demand for Grants for 2015-16 and 
additional provisions of Rs. 400 crore have been ma de for the centrally sponsored scheme Sabla, 
hence a sum of Rs. 475.5 crore has been earmarked f or the scheme for 2015-16. The cost sharing 
ratio between the centre and the state will be same  as for ICDS in the ratio of 50:50 for nutrition 
and 60:40 for rest of the components, as decided by  Ministry of Finance for the scheme ICDS 
including Sabla. For eight North Eastern States (Ar unachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Sikkim) and three sp ecial category Himalayan States (H.P., J&K 
and Uttrakhand), the share of Centre and State/UT w ill be in the ratio of 90:10 and Union 
Territories will be funded 100% of the financial no rms as against the central assistance of 50% for 
nutrition and 100% for non nutrition being practice d earlier. Accordingly, on adjusting the savings 
available with States/UTs, a sum of Rs. 24363.99 la kh including liability of Rs 7743.6 lakh of 
2014-15 have been released under Sabla  (including KSY) in September, 2015. From the year 
2015-16, with the reduced budget available under th e scheme Sabla, the States would require to 
put in more money as State share. In the event Stat es fails to do so implementation of the scheme 
will be affected. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
The Committee observes that the Ministry has given data for the scheme of Sabla 
only, while the data of other schemes have not been  provided. The Ministry has failed to 
specify the reasons as to why BE allocation has bee n drastically brought down at the RE 
stage in all the major schemes. Also, the Ministry has not given the reasons on the failure to 
utilise the funds allocated to the full extent in t he major schemes and also non-utilisation of 
funds in the scheme of National Nutrition Mission. The Ministry has not mentioned the 
reason why there has been no allocation of funds fo r the scheme of One Stop Crisis Centre at 
the RE stage. It seems that the Ministry has not ch ecked the problems/hurdles faced in the 
proper implementation of the schemes. Without the p roper monitoring of these schemes by 
the Ministry, the Committee is dismayed to point ou t that the very implementation of these 
schemes may get affected. 
For the scheme of Sabla, there has been proper util isation of funds during 2012-13 
and 2013-14. However in the year 2014-15, the funds  have not been utilised to the fullest 
extent, the reason for which has not been given by the Ministry. The Committee appreciates 
the efforts of the Ministry in covering the targete d number of beneficiaries for nutrition 
during 2014-15.  
The Committee is sad to note that implementation of  such an important scheme will 
be affected if enough funds are not allotted. The M inistry has submitted that the States 
would require to put in more money as the budget al location for the year 2015-16 for this 
scheme has been reduced. The experience with States  contributing their share had not been 
very encouraging. Hence, the Committee observes tha t the Ministry should take up this issue 
with the States/UTs earnestly so that the implementation of this scheme does not get affected. 
Also, the Ministry should approach the Ministry of Finance for more allocation of funds. 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
2.7 The Committee observes from the reason given by  the Ministry for non-utilization that 
these social sector schemes were included in the Mi nistry’s budget in anticipation that these would 

be approved for the implementation.  But for 2 sche mes out of 8, none could be approved.  
Therefore, the budgetary allocation has not been ut ilized.  It also appears to be the main reason for 
reduction in allocations at RE stage during these y ears. The Committee takes a serious view of 
such an approach on the part of the Ministry in thi s regard and recommends that it should have 
made serious attempt to get all the approvals for t he implementation of the Schemes for better 
utilization of funds. 
 
Action Taken 
Saksham 
 
The Working Group on Child Rights for the 12 
th  Five Year Plan (2012-17) set up by the 
Planning Commission recommended introduction of a n ew scheme for holistic development of 
adolescent  boys (ABs) on the pattern of Sabla . Accordingly, scheme for adolescent boys called 
Saksham was formulated.  
 
As separate budget provisions were earmarked by the  Planning Commission for Sabla and 
Saksham  for the 12th Plan, two separate proposals – Saksham to be appraised by the Standing 
Finance Committee (SFC) and for continuation of Raj iv Gandhi Scheme for Empowerment of 
Adolescent Girls (RGSEAG) - Sabla from XI Plan to XII Plan to be appraised by the Exp enditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) were considered. The SFC ap proved Saksham on 25.02.2014 and 
Sabla was approved by EFC on 28.04.2014. 
 
 Later, to give effect to the recommendation of red ucing the number of Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes of Ministry of Women and Child De velopment (MWCD) to four , it was 
decided that Saksham - adolescent boys need to be brought as a component under the Rajiv Gandhi 
Scheme for Empowerment of Adolescent Girls. The CCE A Note for continuation of Rajiv Gandhi 
Scheme for Empowerment of Adolescent Girls (RGSEAG)  - Sabla from XI Plan to XII Plan 
including the Saksham as a component under Sabla was sent to Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance for approval. Hence, pending approval of the  competent authority funds 
were not released to  States in 2014-15 for implementation of  Saksham.   
 
The comments received from Department of Expenditur e, Ministry of Finance vide O.M. 
No. 42(9)/P.F.II/2008 dated 3rd February, 2015 on the draft CCEA Note are as under :- 
The new component recommended by SFC for Saksham wh ich has only Rs. 99.54 crore 
available is not supported as it is unlikely to hav e any meaningful impact on the ground. 
Therefore, the implementation of Saksham could be left entirely to the State Governments. 
Based on the comments received from Ministry of Fin ance, and no allocation made by 
Ministry of Finance for the scheme Saksham in GBS f or 2015- 16, the scheme could not be 
implemented. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 It is unfortunate to note that the Ministry of Fin ance has not allotted any fund for the 
implementation of SAKSHAM. The Ministry has failed to cite any reason why schemes such 
as Restorative Justice for Rape Victims, Women’s he lpline, Assistance for construction of 
shelter home for single women have still not been a pproved for implementation. The 

Committee is of the view that the issue of non-appr oval of the schemes for implementation 
needs to be worked out at the earliest so that the public, at large, are not deprived of the 
benefits of these schemes. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
2.11 The Committee notes the concerted efforts made  by the Ministry to liquidate the pending 
UCs and the progress made so far.  However, it woul d like to point out that in spite of their efforts, 
there is still a good number of UCs that are pendin g.  Consistent efforts on the part of the Ministry 
are required for liquidation of the remaining UCs.  Constraints faced in the procedural formalities 
and accounting system need to be identified and add ressed so as to ensure compliance with all the 
prescribed requirements.  The Committee hopes that urgent steps on a priority basis would be 
taken by the Ministry to liquidate the remaining UC s especially the old UCs and desires that a 
status note may be furnished to the Committee at the earliest for its perusal and consideration.  
 
Action taken 
As on date 4995 Utilization Certificates are pendin g amounting to Rs. 652.32 crores as per 
CCA HRD website. Funds are not released to any orga nization from which UC is due. UCs 
received form by Implementing Agencies based on aud ited accounts for each year is being 
forwarded to PAO for getting the pending UCs liquid ated. As on date there are 38 UCs pending 
for RGNCS, wherein, 22 UCs pending for 2014-15. Eff orts are being taken to get pending UCs 
liquidated. 720 UCs are pending in Swadhar Section.  Efforts are being made to dispose of the 
pending UCs by writing to concerned NGOs/State Governments. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
 The Committee is not happy with the way the Minist ry tackles this issue of Utilisation 
Certificates. Latest status of Utilisation Certific ates does not indicate a satisfactory position. 
The Committee would appreciate if proactive efforts  are initiated by the Ministry for 
liquidating the very old Utilisation Certificates. The Committee desires that a detailed status 
report be sent to the Committee. The Committee desi res that the modalities and a status 
report be sent to the Committee. Simultaneously, pe ndency pertaining to the recent years 
also needs to be brought to the minimum level. Cont inuance of pending Utilisation 
Certificates only indicates that the various scheme s meant for the welfare of children and 
women, the most vulnerable sections of the society are not being implemented in a time-
bound manner. The Committee also recommends the Min istry to prepare a timeline to get 
the UCs and take punitive action against defaulting  organizations for non-submission of 
Utilization Certificates. 
 
IV. INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES SCHEME (I CDS) 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
4.5 The Committee notes that there has been a consi stent increase in the allocations over the 
last three years, except for the current year of 20 15-16 where the allocation has been reduced 

substantially to Rs. 8335.77.  The ICDS Scheme is t he biggest and most unique programme. The 
Committee, however, observes that budget cut this y ear is in total contrast to the significance of 
the Scheme.  There will be difficulty in meeting th e expenses of the targets laid down by the 
Ministry, though the Finance Minister has promised additional funds.  The Ministry expressed its 
serious concern regarding the budget cut and did no t have a back-up plan to cover these expenses.  
All hope lies with the States that they will contribute their share.  But this is doubtful that it will be 
done in time observing the past trend of the perfor mances of States/UTs in contributing their share 
towards meeting the expenses of the schemes.  With an amount of Rs. 17, 000 crores being 
devolved by the Centre to the States and also Rs. 2,85,000 crores to urban local bodies, it is hoped 
that the national priorities laid down by the Gover nment will be followed by States/UTs. The 
Committee desires to know the extent these Schemes are likely to be affected in case States does 
not follow Centre in this regard.  Instant arrangem ent be made for the allocation announced by the 
Finance Minister.  
  
Action Taken 
 
The Government had approved strengthening and restr ucturing of ICDS Scheme with an 
outlay of Rs. 1,23,580 crore for implementation dur ing 12th Plan. However, as per erstwhile 
Planning Commission GBS and actual allocation there  was huge gap under ICDS as per details 
given below: 
Year Outlay 
Approved by 
Cabinet 
Allocation as 
per Planning 
Commission 
GBS 
Actual 
Allocation 
(BE/RE) 
Expenditure 
2012-13 16,542 15,850 15,850/15,850 15,701.50 
2013-14 22,027 17,225 17,700/16,312 16,267.49 
2014-15 26,533 19,425 18,195/16,561.60  16,581.82 
2015-16 28,454 23,025 11,935.77  
2016-17 30,025 27,478   
Total 1,23,581 1,03,003 57,059.39 48,550.81 
P.S. : The average expenditure for 2012-13,2013-14 and 2014-15 is Rs. 16183.60. The Short 
fall in current year is Rs. 7298.00 crore (approx.) 
 
Due to reduced budget allocation in 2014-15 the fol lowing activities under restructured 
ICDS could not be taken up: 
(i)  Recruitment of technical manpower 
(ii)  Sanction for construction of AWC in 2014-15 
(iii)  Sanction for AWC-cum-Crèche in 2014-15 
(iv)  Sanction for maintenance of AWCs 
(v)  Lesser amount released to States in 2013-14 
(vi)  Sanction for innovative Schemes 
(vii)  Sanction for grading and accreditation of AW Cs. 
 
From the year 2015-16, with the reduced budget avai lable under ICDS Scheme, the States 
would be required to put in more money as their sha re. In the event the State fails to do so, the 
implementation of ICDS Scheme will be seriously jeo pardised by abandoning most of the vital 
components of ICDS Scheme. 

 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Ministry has claimed that many important activ ities under the ICDS could not be 
taken up due to insufficient funds. The Committee w ould like to point out that the Ministry 
has not taken up this issue earnestly with the Mini stry of Finance nor has the Ministry 
mentioned any back-up plan if the States fail to co ntribute their shares. Instead of exploring 
ways to make this scheme more successful, the Minis try has chosen to give a very 
perfunctory reply. The Committee feels that Ministr y should put in more collaborative 
efforts to see that the State Governments contribut e their share as soon as possible so that 
the projected targets can be achieved efficiently and in a timely manner. The Committee is of 
the view that the outreach of ICDS should be extend ed to every habitation and groups so 
that more women and children benefit from the schem e. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterates that the problem of insufficient funds s hould be dealt with earnestly without any 
delay. 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
4.13 The Committee observes that in terms of toilet  facilities in AWCs, barring a few States like 
Nagaland, Uttrakhand and UTs like Chandigarh, Delhi , Daman and Diu and Lakshadweep, almost 
all the States have a long way to go to achieve thi s target.  This is a sad situation, when the 
Hon’ble Prime Minister of this Nation is spreading the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan to every nook and 
corner of the country, the AWCs are not being provi ded with the most basic of facilities like 
drinking water and toilets. The Committee would like to point out that the Ministry should identify 
the hurdles that came up in this process and should be dealt with earnestly.  
 
Action Taken 
 
There are 13.42 lakh operational Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) out of 14.00 lakhs 
sanctioned AWCs. The number of toilets facilities a vailable in these operational AWCs is 6.29 
lakh. Therefore, 7.12 lakh toilets are required to be constructed in AWCs. Under the restructured 
ICDS, a provision for construction of 2 lakh AWC bu ildings @ Rs.4.5 lakh per unit has been 
made. Provision of toilet in each newly constructed  building is an integral part of the construction. 
Further, provision for upgradation of 2 lakh AWC bu ilding @ Rs.1 lakh per unit has also been 
made. As per Broad Frame work document, up-gradatio n includes provision of child friendly 
buildings, water supply and sanitation. The cost sh aring ratio between Centre and States is 75:25 
[90:10 for NER]. During 2014-15, 20,463 toilets hav e been constructed in the AWCs. The hurdles 
that came up in the process of providing toilet facilities are as under: 
 
i)  The States/UTs are finding great difficulties i n providing land for construction of 
AWC buildings in urban areas across the country. Al so, the rental costs for 
establishing the AWCs in urban areas are very high.  In this context it is stated that 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation ( HUPA) has proposed to offer 
NUHM to utilize the community structures constructe d under the Slum 
Development Therefore, MWCD requested MoHUPA to all ow the ICDS Scheme 
of MWCD to utilise a part of, and access the commun ity centres constructed by 
M/o HUPA for housing AWCs. 
 

ii)  Lack of funds in this context it is stated tha t earlier construction of toilets in AWCs 
was financed by M/o Drinking Water and Sanitation u nder Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan. 
Of late MoDW&S has decided that construction of toi lets in AWCs is to be 
financed by MWCD. However, pursuant to the acceptan ce of the recommendations 
of the fourteenth Finance, the funds to the local b odies has been increased from Rs. 
87,000 crores to Rs. 2,87,000 crores. Consequently,  Panchayats and Urban Local 
Bodies are likely to receive over Rs.2,00,000 crores. Therefore, M/o Panchayati Raj 
has been requested for taking up the matter with St ate Governments and 
Panachayati Raj Institutions and Urban Local Bodies  for utilization of these funds 
to augment or build anganwadi infrastructure, including toilets. 
 
iii)  Administrative delay in processing the case. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
 AWCs are expected to play a vital role in carrying  out the activities under the ICDS 
scheme. However, most of the AWCs lack basic facili ties such as drinking water, toilets etc. 
According to the Ministry, less than fifty per cent  of the AWCs in the country have toilet 
facilities. The Committee would like to point out t hat the Ministry has a long way to go in 
achieving the projected targets. The Ministry has l isted out the hurdles that came in the 
process of providing toilets in AWCs, however, ways  to solve these hurdles have not been 
provided. 
World Bank assisted ICDS Systems Strengthening and Nutrition Project (ISSNIP) 
Recommendations/observations  
4.16  The Committee feels that nothing much has bee n done for a project which was 
launched on 9 
th  May, 2013.  The time period of the Phase 1 of the project is coming to a close, yet 
no achievements have been made so far.  For such an  important scheme, steps should be taken up 
by the Ministry so that effective results are broug ht about by the proper implementation of the 
Scheme. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Hon‘ble Committee‘s observations have been noted for compliance. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
 The Committee observes that two years have passed since the scheme was launched, 
yet no achievements have been made so far. The Comm ittee is of the view that the Ministry 
has not taken up this issue seriously. The Committe e strongly feels that the Ministry should 
properly implement this scheme so that the maximum benefits can be derived from this 
scheme. 
 
 
  

Staff and Key Functionaries of ICDS 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
4.21 The Committee would like to emphasize that the  problem of vacant positions of key ICDS 
functionaries - AWHs, Supervisors and CDPOs continu es to persist which adversely affect the 
delivery of services in an AWC.  With the expansion  and strengthening of ICDS Scheme, a lot 
more efforts need to be made in order to fill the v acancies.  The Committee was made to 
understand that the Ministry has been trying to red uce the vacancy position.  ICDS functionaries 
play a vital role in the functioning of the various  ICDS Scheme. So, for every scheme to achieve 
its targets/goals and to function efficiently, the vacancy problem that continues for a long time 
needs to be addressed as soon as possible. The Comm ittee also observes that Anganwadi Workers 
must be remunerated adequately properly so that the y are motivated to perform their requisite 
tasks.  
  
Action Taken 
 
The Hon‘ble Committee‘s observations have been noted for compliance. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The successful implementation of the ICDS scheme s olely depends on its staff. The 
Committee is of the view that all problem areas sho uld be sorted out and pave the way for 
filling up of posts of ICDS functionaries. The Mini stry should take up this matter with the 
concerned State Government at the earliest. The nee d of the hour is to re-vitalise the ICDS 
scheme by filling up of vacant posts without any further delay. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
 
4.24 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the M inistry in increasing the remuneration paid 
to Anganwadi Workers and also other benefits given to them but feels that they are still on the 
lower side and require upward revision for better i mplementation of the Schemes. The Committee 
further points out that there seems to be no pensio n scheme for the AWWs/AWHs.  It is to be 
understood that the AWWs are the most crucial funct ionary of ICDS Scheme. The Committee, 
therefore, would like to again emphasize that the p resence of a committed cadre of these 
functionaries is an important tool for successful implementation of any scheme.  
 
Action Taken 
 
ICDS Scheme envisages the Anganwadi Workers and Ang nawadi Helpers as ― honorary 
workers ǁ from the local community who come forward to rende r their services, on part-time basis, 
in the areas of child care and development. They ar e paid fixed honorarium per month as decided 
by the Government from time to time. Presently, AWW s and AWHs are paid Honoraria of Rs. 
3000/- and Rs.1500/-per month w.e.f. 01-04-2011. AW Ws of Mini – AWCs are being paid 
honoraria of Rs. 2250/- w.e.f. 04-07-2013. Apart fr om these, additional amount of honoraria are 
also paid by most of the State Governments / UT Adm inistrations from their own resources. The 
revision of honorarium of AWWs and AWHs is a contin uous process and is revised by the 

Government of India from time to time. Since AWWs a nd AWHs are honorary workers the 
pension benefits are not applicable to them. GOI ha s sanctioned 14 lacs AWCs to States/UTs 
across the country in turn States/UTs have sanction ed 1349010 AWCs. Against 1349010 
operational Anganwadi centres only 1293428 AWWs are in position leaving 55582 AWCs without 
AWWs. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The AWWs and AWHs play a very important role in th e proper implementation of 
the ICDS scheme. They perform a myriad of activitie s. It is important that these workers are 
remunerated properly. The Committee takes note of t he efforts undertaken by the 
Government of India in revising the honoraria of AW Ws from time to time. The Committee 
is of the view that paying a sum of only Rs. 2250/-  per month to the workers is quite less as 
compared to the work performed by these AWWs. It is  high time that the Ministry enhance 
the honorarium paid to AWWs as they are the most crucial functionary of the ICDS scheme.  
Recommendations/observations  
4.26 The Committee would like to emphasize that awa rds work as incentives for boosting the 
morale of workers and making them more involved in their official responsibilities.  Delay in 
awarding the worker for more than 5 years can only be considered as making a mockery of 
principle of giving incentives by any organization.   The Committee accordingly, recommends that 
the selection process should be completed without a ny further delay and services of deserving 
functionaries be duly recognized. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Hon‘ble Committee‘s observations have been noted for compliance. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee is disappointed with the way the iss ue of finalising the awards for 
ICDS functionaries is being tackled. The committee is of the view that any award has to be 
announced and given at the earliest. Only then, it can be ensured that the awardees have 
been motivated in the real sense. This fact may be impressed upon the concerned State 
Governments. Procedural constraints leading to undu e delay may be identified and 
corrective steps should be taken accordingly. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
4.28 The Committee takes note of the various findin gs of the study and suggests that more 
initiatives should be taken to improve the programm e implementation. The Ministry should 
innovate new ways to tackle malnutrition, for examp le, use of technology to identify and monitor 
malnutrition among children, improving the quality of Take Home Rations, etc. 
Action Taken 
 
The Hon‘ble Committee‘s observations have been noted for compliance. 
 

Comments of the Committee 
 
 The said study was conducted in the year 2009. Step s taken to improve upon the 
implementation of the scheme in accordance with the  key findings of the study has not been 
put forward by the Ministry. The Committee feels th at the problem areas as pointed out by 
the study need to be looked into without any furthe r delay. The Committee would like to be 
apprised about the steps taken by the Ministry to i mprove the scheme based on this study. 
The Ministry should make sure that maximum number of women and children should derive 
benefits from this scheme. 
 
VIII.  INDIRA GANDHI MATRITVA SAHYOG YOJANA (IGMSY) 
 
Recommendations/observations  
8.6   The Committee feels that the shortfall in acc omplishment of the targets is constantly rising 
up every year.  The Committee, therefore, recommend s the Ministry to make serious efforts with 
cooperation of the State Governments in putting in place the necessary structures for service 
delivery to maximum pregnant and nursing women requ iring cash incentives for their health, 
nutrition and also partial compensation for their wage loss. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The observation of committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
 The Committee feels that the Ministry has not put in place a mechanism to ensure 
that maximum pregnant and nursing women are benefit ted from this scheme. The 
Committee is disappointed with the lackadaisical at titude of the Ministry towards this 
scheme. The Ministry has failed to specify the reas ons why achievements of this scheme have 
been constantly declining. The Committee feels that  the Ministry should take up this issue 
seriously so the very objective of this scheme can be fulfilled. 
 
X. RASHTRIYA MAHILA KOSH (RMK) 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
10.4  With Andaman and Nicobar Islands as exception , the Committee observes that in 
all the States/UTs, the amount of loan disbursed to  poor women was less than the sanctioned 
amount indicating that funds are lying un-utilized with IMOs in these States.  The Committee is 
dismayed with the findings that in certain States l ike Karnataka and Punjab, less than half of the 
sanctioned amount was being disbursed.  The same si tuation prevails in the UT of Puducherry in 
which funds amounting to only `16 crore is being disbursed since inception against  a sanctioned 
amount of `51 crore.  A major discrepancy observed by the Comm ittee is the number of 
beneficiaries vis-à-vis loans disbursed.  In the St ate of Assam e.g. against `453.90 lakh disbursed, 
there were only 6605 beneficiaries.  The same can b e said for the State of Bihar where `468.83 
lakh benefitted 17,156 women.  The Committee notes this issue and strongly feels that a 
monitoring mechanism should be put in place to curt ail any discrepancy that arises in the whole 

process.  Also, the Committee feels that the fund s anctioned should be duly disbursed without any 
delay as this Scheme aims for the economic empowerment of the poor women. 
Action Taken 
As per loan norms of RMK, Sanctioned loan is disbur sed in two parts. 50% of the 
sanctioned loan is released immediately after sanct ion and execution of necessary loan documents 
by the NGOs. 2nd and last installment of 50% sancti oned loan is released after completion of the 
following formalities:- 
(i)  Submission of required Disbursement certificat e, list of beneficiaries with their 
photographs and signature, and 2nd Drawl applicatio n with appendance to drawal, 
etc. by the loanee NGOs. 
(ii)  Conduction of Post Sanction Study (PSS) by RM K officials other than the 
sanctioning officials. This PSS is usually conducte d after completion of initial 6 
months of moratorium. During this PSS the RMK offic ials see the end use of funds 
released in 1st instalment and after ensuring the s atisfactory utilization of funds 
they recommend for 2nd release. 
Thus it will be observed that it is not the questio n of sanctioned loan funds lying unutilized 
but rather pending compliance of aforesaid conditio ns, that this difference between the sanctioned 
and disbursed amounts happen. 
 
Pointed out state wise position is given below: 
  Punjab :  Against the sanctioned amount of Rs. 141 lacs, r eleased amount is 
Rs 103.50 lacs and not Rs. 37.50 lacs. Reason being  one NGO from Sangrur, Punjab 
namely Bisnouli Sarvodaya Gramodyog Sewa Sansthan a ccount no. 1878 and 1663 was 
sanctioned Rs. 66 lacs and was released 100% itself  in two stages. But during the loan 
period itself this account was transferred from Pun jab state to Delhi consequent upon their 
shifting. Hence amount of Rs. 66 lacs was appearing  in Delhi State. Thus total 
disbursement for Punjab state is Rs. 103.50 (37.50 + 66) lacs and not only Rs. 37.50 lacs as 
given in the table.  
Karnataka :  The major cause of difference between sanctioned  and disbursed 
amount is because of the aforesaid reason given in para (a) above. There seem to be a 
typical mistake. Against the sanction amount of Rs. 51 lacs  and not crore that Rs. 16 lacs is 
disbursed. Hence this amount should be read in lacs  only as the tabular figures are in lacs 
only. For UT Puducherry, the difference between san ctioned and disbursed amount is 
because of the aforesaid reason given in para (a) above. 
 
As regards the observation of Hon‘ble Committee mem bers on the no. of beneficiaries vis-
à-vis loan disbursed, it is submitted that it depen ds upon the kind of activity for which loan is 
sanctioned. From the given figures, arrived at per beneficiary loan amount of Rs. 6,872 for Assam 
state is for purchase of milch animals, silk worm r earing, piggery etc. while in Bihar per 
beneficiary loan amount of Rs. 2,732 is towards goa try, pickle, masala making, etc. Hence there is 
no direct relation between the number of beneficiaries and loan amount. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply. As regards the non-utilization of sanctioned 
amount, it appears that the respective State Govern ments did not comply to the norms of 

RMK. The Committee is concerned about this aspect a s it appears from the reply of the 
Government that the Ministry is unable to control t his trend. The Committee is constrained 
to observe that such a plea cannot be tenable. The Ministry of Women and Child 
Development has to be proactive in motivating the r espective State Governments to comply 
with the norms of the scheme; ascertain the difficu lties, if any, are being faced by them and 
find the way how the issue of non-utilization of sa nctioned grants can be addressed. If need 
be, the Ministry can also revisit its norms. Furthe r, the Committee fails to understand how 
one NGO from Punjab was permitted to transfer its a ccount to Delhi. The Committee 
believes that the grants are State specific and acc ordingly desires a detailed note on this 
issue. 
 
XI.  HOSTELS FOR WORKING WOMEN 
  
Recommendations/observations  
11.4  The Committee was given to understand that th e Working Women Hostel Scheme 
was evaluated by Indira Gandhi National Open Univer sity (IGNOU), New Delhi and found that 
the Scheme of Working Women Hostel is serving the p urpose for which it was formulated.  
Therefore, further continuation of the scheme was r ecommended. The Committee feels that a lot 
more can be done for improving the performance of t he scheme with respect to construction of 
more hostels for working women.  All the bottleneck s and hurdles that come up in implementation 
of the scheme should be identified and viable solut ions should be formulated to tackle any such 
hurdles.  Such a good scheme has some inherent problems that need to be taken care of urgently. 
Action Taken 
The Hon‘ble Committee‘s observations have been noted for compliance. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Ministry has not furnished any information abo ut the steps taken to improve 
upon this scheme. The Committee would like to empha size that efforts should be made to 
expand this scheme. 
 
[ 
XV.   NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WOMEN (NCW) 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
15.9   During the deliberations of the Committee, t he issue of non-existence of any 
schemes/activities for protection and welfare of wo men under Nirbhaya Fund was raised. The 
Committee understands that no substantial schemes/p rogrammes have been finalized although 
allocations of funds were available for the purpose  for the last 2 to 3 years. The Committee would 
like to point out that the Nirbhaya Fund had a tota l of 3000 crore as 1000 crore each was allocated 
to it in 2014-15 and 2015-16 on top of `1000 crore intial corpus. The Fund has been lying u n-
utilized for last three years. No clear strategy ha s come up to ensure proper utilization of the fund 
allocated.  On a specific query regarding this issu e, the Ministry replied that the Ministry of 
Surface Transport had come up with the proposal of about `1400 crores, which has been already 
sanctioned.  Also, the Ministry of Home Affairs has  also come up with a comprehensive scheme 
for about `321 crore.  The Committee observes that the Ministr y has not come up with any 
concrete action plan to utilize this Fund.  Women s afety is a major priority and to deal with and 

prevent the rising crimes against women, it is high  time that the Ministry comes up with steps to 
ensure women safety.  The Committee also desires th at a status note on the use of this Fund may 
be submitted to the Committee at the earliest for its perusal. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Nirbhaya Fund is being administered by Departme nt of Economic Affairs (DEA), 
Ministry of Finance. Recently , the Ministry of Wom en and Child Development has been 
designated as nodal Ministry on 25.03.2015 to appra ise the schemes/proposals which seek funding 
from the Nirbhaya Fund. Two schemes of Ministry of Women and Child Development i.e One 
Stop Centre for Women affected by violence with total project cost of Rs. 18.58 crore approved on 
4th March, 2015 and Scheme for Universalisation of Women Helpline with a total project cost Rs. 
69.49 crore approved on 19th February, 2015 to be f unded through Nirbhaya Fund for 
implementation from the financial year 2015-16.  
A status note on the projects of Ministry of Women of Nirbhaya fund is as follows: 
 
a) One Stop Centre  
  Three Programme Approval Board (PAB) meeting have  been held for the States of 
Chhatisgarh, Chandigarh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim, Andam an & Nicobar Islands, Assam, 
Nagaland, and Daman & Diu so far. An amount of Rs. 37,68,927 has been sanctioned 
setting up One Stop Centre in Raipur, Chhatisgarh. 
  The proposal for releasing fund for Chandigarh, U ttarakhand, Sikkim, Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, Assam, Nagaland, and Daman & Diu are under process. 
 
b) Universalisation of Women Helpline  
 Implementation guideline alongwith Scheme document  have been sent to 
states/UTs on 18 th  May, 2015 with the request to send the proposal in  prescribed format in 
consonance of the approved scheme by 29 th  May, 2015. However, we have not received proposal 
from any States/UTs. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the action tak en by the Ministry in this regard. 
The Committee is of the view that only a small frac tion of the fund allotted is utilised. Crime 
against women is on the rise. Many more steps can b e taken up to tackle this issue. 
Concerted efforts have not been taken up by the Min istry. It is unfortunate that huge funds 
are lying idle when so much can be done for the pro tection and welfare of women. It is to be 
noted that this Nirbhaya Fund was available since l ast 2 to 3 years. It is high time that the 
Ministry should take up this matter earnestly. 
 
XVI. RESEARCH, PUBLICATION AND MONIORING, INFORMATI ON AND MASS 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
16.2 The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need for having a re-look of different 
activities to be undertaken for better implementati on as well as expanding reach of different 
schemes.  A comprehensive advocacy and awareness ge neration policy and plan of action has to 
be developed and implemented that will ensure publi c awareness about the existing policies and 

programmes for women and children at all levels.  H ence, the Committee recommends that all out 
efforts be made to create public awareness about the schemes/programmes of the Ministry.  
 
Action Taken 
As far as the Research and Publication scheme is co ncerned, the observations made by the 
Committee has been noted for compliance. However, for better implementation of existing policies 
and programmes in the Ministry and its expending re ach, various divisions/bureaus need to be 
consulted. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Research and Publication scheme is very import ant in spreading awareness 
among the public about the schemes handled by the M inistry. It is unfortunate to note that 
most of the funds allocated for this scheme remaine d unutilised. The Ministry should ensure 
that the information of each scheme should reach ev ery nook and corner of the country. 
Therefore, it is imperative that the Ministry consu lts all the necessary authorities so that 
public awareness of all the schemes of the Ministry can be created.  
 
XVII. GENDER BUDGETING 
 
Recommendations/observations 
17.4  Like Gender Budgeting, Child Budgeting can be  considered another major initiative 
in sensitizing and institutionalizing child-related  concerns. For this purpose, the Committee notes 
that the Ministry will have to build capacities to analyse the Central and State budgets and their 
impact on the betterment children. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The observation of the Committee has been noted fo r compliance. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Ministry should have informed the Committee re garding the plans to take up 
child budgeting or not. The Ministry should have pu t forth the plans and action to be taken 
up regarding child budgeting. Mere noting for compl iance will not do any good for the 
children who are one of the most vulnerable sections of the society. 
 
XVIII.     CONCLUSION 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
18.1 The Ministry of Women and Child Development wa s set up as a nodal agency with the 
prime aim to empower and promote holistic developme nt and welfare of women and children who 
are considered the vulnerable sections of society.  The Ministry has formulated many women and 
child centred legislations, plans, policies and pro grammes to ensure women’s empowerment as 
well as gender equality to the extent possible and to ensure children’s holistic development and 
growth.  The Committee is aware that the Ministry has to cater to more than 70 per cent of the total 

population and that too the most vulnerable ones.  It, therefore, has indeed a massive 
responsibility.  The Committee finds the performanc e of the Ministry satisfactory but still a lot 
more needs to be done, particularly for arresting t he rising crimes against women and children.  
The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry shou ld ensure safety and security to women 
including at the workplace, by ending all forms of discrimination, exploitation, harassment and 
violence against women by strictly implementing the  relevant laws promulgated for the purpose.  
Further, the Ministry should strive towards ensurin g zero tolerance to all kinds of exploitation of 
children including child labour, sexual abuse and v iolence, by providing legislative and 
institutional support. The Committee is of the view  that the Ministry would find it very difficult to 
fulfill the objectives of empowerment of women in a ll walks of life due to massive cut in funds 
this year. The Committee also feels that it should have better coordination with the State 
Governments and various agencies, NGOs for implemen ting women/children centric schemes for 
more better results. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The Committee’s observations are noted for complia nce. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee takes note of the various efforts ta ken up by the Ministry to handle 
various issues relating to welfare of women and chi ldren. However, the Committee observes 
that the Ministry has failed to provide information  and data on various important schemes 
and the some of the information given are not up to  date. The Ministry has adopted a very 
casual approach while replying on the recommendatio ns of the Committee. Many issues and 
challenges regarding the welfare and protection of women and children are in lurch. It is 
hoped that the Ministry adopt serious and concerted efforts in tackling such problems.  
 The Committee is exasperated to note that out of i ts 35 recommendations contained in 
the report, the Ministry of Women and Child Develop ment has merely “noted for 
compliance” on 18 of those recommendations even tho ugh the financial year is coming to an 
end. No steps/action taken by them has been indicat ed in the ATN. Many of the figures 
provided by the Ministry are not up to date and in some cases, figures for the current 
financial year are missing altogether. These do not  speak well of the Ministry and the casual 
approach being adopted by them in implementing various schemes does not bode well for the 
future of women and children of this country. The C ommittee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should start with a new zeal to ensure  that such a important facet of the society 
i.e., women and child development does not suffer d ue to their apathy and urgent steps 
should be taken seriously for the future of the country. 
 The Ministry was mandated to provide the Action Ta ken Note on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Repor t within 90 days of the 
presentation/laying of the Report. However, the Com mittee is anguished to note that despite 
several reminders, the same was received quite late . Hence, the Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should strictly adhere to the stipulated timeframe. 
  

 
CHAPTER-IV' 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
Recommendations/observations   
7.6 As is evident from the table above, the nutriti on aspect of the scheme has taken off, 
however a lot more can be done in the non-nutrition  aspect so that maximum benefits can be 
derived out of this scheme.  The Committee finds th at majority of the States reported under-
utilisation with many states/UTs had zero utilizati on of funds.  Also some of the States have not 
submitted information about their utilization status nor has it been furnished by the Ministry.  
 
 
***** 
  

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
  
The Committee observes that the financial year is c oming to a close, yet no concrete 
actions appear to have been taken up. The Committee, accordingly, desires that the details of 
action taken during this period be furnished for it s appraisal. Committee, further, desires 
that the decision of the cost sharing ratio between  the Centre and the States should be taken 
up at the earliest, lest the scheme should suffer. The Committee is of the considered view that 
the Ministry should consult on this issue with the Ministry of Finance so as to ensure that the 
States contribute their matching share.               (Para 2.3) 
 
 
  
The Committee observes that the Ministry has given data for the scheme of Sabla 
only, while the data of other schemes have not been  provided. The Ministry has failed to 
specify the reasons as to why BE allocation has bee n drastically brought down at the RE 
stage in all the major schemes. Also, the Ministry has not given the reasons on the failure to 
utilise the funds allocated to the full extent in t he major schemes and also non-utilisation of 
funds in the scheme of National Nutrition Mission. The Ministry has not mentioned the 
reason why there has been no allocation of funds fo r the scheme of One Stop Crisis Centre at 
the RE stage. It seems that the Ministry has not ch ecked the problems/hurdles faced in the 
proper implementation of the schemes. Without the p roper monitoring of these schemes by 
the Ministry, the Committee is dismayed to point ou t that the very implementation of these 
schemes may get affected. 
For the scheme of Sabla, there has been proper util isation of funds during 2012-13 
and 2013-14. However in the year 2014-15, the funds  have not been utilised to the fullest 
extent, the reason for which has not been given by the Ministry. The Committee appreciates 
the efforts of the Ministry in covering the targete d number of beneficiaries for nutrition 
during 2014-15.  
The Committee is sad to note that implementation of  such an important scheme will 
be affected if enough funds are not allotted. The M inistry has submitted that the States 
would require to put in more money as the budget al location for the year 2015-16 for this 
scheme has been reduced. The experience with States  contributing their share had not been 
very encouraging. Hence, the Committee observes tha t the Ministry should take up this issue 
with the States/UTs earnestly so that the implementation of this scheme does not get affected. 
Also, the Ministry should approach the Ministry of Finance for more allocation of funds. 
                         (Para 2.5) 
 
 
 
 It is unfortunate to note that the Ministry of Fin ance has not allotted any fund for the 
implementation of SAKSHAM. The Ministry has failed to cite any reason why schemes such 
as Restorative Justice for Rape Victims, Women’s he lpline, Assistance for construction of 
shelter home for single women have still not been a pproved for implementation. The 
Committee is of the view that the issue of non-appr oval of the schemes for implementation 
needs to be worked out at the earliest so that the public, at large, are not deprived of the 
benefits of these schemes.                 (Para 2. 7) 
 
 
 
 The Committee is not happy with the way the Minist ry tackles this issue of Utilisation 
Certificates. Latest status of Utilisation Certific ates does not indicate a satisfactory position. 

The Committee would appreciate if proactive efforts  are initiated by the Ministry for 
liquidating the very old Utilisation Certificates. The Committee desires that a detailed status 
report be sent to the Committee. The Committee desi res that the modalities and a status 
report be sent to the Committee. Simultaneously, pe ndency pertaining to the recent years 
also needs to be brought to the minimum level. Cont inuance of pending Utilisation 
Certificates only indicates that the various scheme s meant for the welfare of children and 
women, the most vulnerable sections of the society are not being implemented in a time-
bound manner. The Committee also recommends the Min istry to prepare a timeline to get 
the UCs and take punitive action against defaulting  organizations for non-submission of 
Utilization Certificates.               (Para 2.11)  
 
IV. INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES SCHEME (I CDS) 
 
 
 The Ministry has claimed that many important activ ities under the ICDS could not be 
taken up due to insufficient funds. The Committee w ould like to point out that the Ministry 
has not taken up this issue earnestly with the Mini stry of Finance nor has the Ministry 
mentioned any back-up plan if the States fail to co ntribute their shares. Instead of exploring 
ways to make this scheme more successful, the Minis try has chosen to give a very 
perfunctory reply. The Committee feels that Ministr y should put in more collaborative 
efforts to see that the State Governments contribut e their share as soon as possible so that 
the projected targets can be achieved efficiently and in a timely manner. The Committee is of 
the view that the outreach of ICDS should be extend ed to every habitation and groups so 
that more women and children benefit from the schem e. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterates that the problem of insufficient funds s hould be dealt with earnestly without any 
delay.                    (Para 4.5) 
 
 
 AWCs are expected to play a vital role in carrying  out the activities under the ICDS 
scheme. However, most of the AWCs lack basic facili ties such as drinking water, toilets etc. 
According to the Ministry, less than fifty per cent  of the AWCs in the country have toilet 
facilities. The Committee would like to point out t hat the Ministry has a long way to go in 
achieving the projected targets. The Ministry has l isted out the hurdles that came in the 
process of providing toilets in AWCs, however, ways  to solve these hurdles have not been 
provided.               (Para 4.13) 
 
World Bank assisted ICDS Systems Strengthening and Nutrition Project (ISSNIP) 
 
 
 
 The Committee observes that two years have passed since the scheme was launched, 
yet no achievements have been made so far. The Comm ittee is of the view that the Ministry 
has not taken up this issue seriously. The Committe e strongly feels that the Ministry should 
properly implement this scheme so that the maximum benefits can be derived from this 
scheme.                (Para 4.16) 
 
 
  

Staff and Key Functionaries of ICDS 
 
 The successful implementation of the ICDS scheme s olely depends on its staff. The 
Committee is of the view that all problem areas sho uld be sorted out and pave the way for 
filling up of posts of ICDS functionaries. The Mini stry should take up this matter with the 
concerned State Government at the earliest. The nee d of the hour is to re-vitalise the ICDS 
scheme by filling up of vacant posts without any further delay.                       (Para 4.21) 
 
 The AWWs and AWHs play a very important role in th e proper implementation of 
the ICDS scheme. They perform a myriad of activitie s. It is important that these workers are 
remunerated properly. The Committee takes note of t he efforts undertaken by the 
Government of India in revising the honoraria of AW Ws from time to time. The Committee 
is of the view that paying a sum of only Rs. 2250/-  per month to the workers is quite less as 
compared to the work performed by these AWWs. It is  high time that the Ministry enhance 
the honorarium paid to AWWs as they are the most crucial functionary of the ICDS scheme. 
                (Para 4.24)  
 
 The Committee is disappointed with the way the iss ue of finalising the awards for 
ICDS functionaries is being tackled. The committee is of the view that any award has to be 
announced and given at the earliest. Only then, it can be ensured that the awardees have 
been motivated in the real sense. This fact may be impressed upon the concerned State 
Governments. Procedural constraints leading to undu e delay may be identified and 
corrective steps should be taken accordingly.          (Para 4.26) 
 
 
 The said study was conducted in the year 2009. Step s taken to improve upon the 
implementation of the scheme in accordance with the  key findings of the study has not been 
put forward by the Ministry. The Committee feels th at the problem areas as pointed out by 
the study need to be looked into without any furthe r delay. The Committee would like to be 
apprised about the steps taken by the Ministry to i mprove the scheme based on this study. 
The Ministry should make sure that maximum number of women and children should derive 
benefits from this scheme.        (Para 4.28) 
 
VIII.  INDIRA GANDHI MATRITVA SAHYOG YOJANA (IGMSY) 
 
  
 The Committee feels that the Ministry has not put in place a mechanism to ensure 
that maximum pregnant and nursing women are benefit ted from this scheme. The 
Committee is disappointed with the lackadaisical at titude of the Ministry towards this 
scheme. The Ministry has failed to specify the reas ons why achievements of this scheme have 
been constantly declining. The Committee feels that  the Ministry should take up this issue 
seriously so the very objective of this scheme can be fulfilled.     (Para 8.6) 
 
X. RASHTRIYA MAHILA KOSH (RMK) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply. As regards the non-utilization of sanctioned 
amount, it appears that the respective State Govern ments did not comply to the norms of 
RMK. The Committee is concerned about this aspect a s it appears from the reply of the 

Government that the Ministry is unable to control t his trend. The Committee is constrained 
to observe that such a plea cannot be tenable. The Ministry of Women and Child 
Development has to be proactive in motivating the r espective State Governments to comply 
with the norms of the scheme; ascertain the difficu lties, if any, are being faced by them and 
find the way how the issue of non-utilization of sa nctioned grants can be addressed. If need 
be, the Ministry can also revisit its norms. Furthe r, the Committee fails to understand how 
one NGO from Punjab was permitted to transfer its a ccount to Delhi. The Committee 
believes that the grants are State specific and acc ordingly desires a detailed note on this 
issue.           (Para 10.6) 
 
XI.  HOSTELS FOR WORKING WOMEN 
  
 The Ministry has not furnished any information abo ut the steps taken to improve 
upon this scheme. The Committee would like to empha size that efforts should be made to 
expand this scheme.         (Para 11.4) 
 
[ 
XV.   NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WOMEN (NCW) 
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the action tak en by the Ministry in this regard. 
The Committee is of the view that only a small frac tion of the fund allotted is utilised. Crime 
against women is on the rise. Many more steps can b e taken up to tackle this issue. 
Concerted efforts have not been taken up by the Min istry. It is unfortunate that huge funds 
are lying idle when so much can be done for the pro tection and welfare of women. It is to be 
noted that this Nirbhaya Fund was available since l ast 2 to 3 years. It is high time that the 
Ministry should take up this matter earnestly.          (Para 15.9) 
 
XVI. RESEARCH, PUBLICATION AND MONIORING, INFORMATI ON AND MASS 
 
 
 The Research and Publication scheme is very import ant in spreading awareness 
among the public about the schemes handled by the M inistry. It is unfortunate to note that 
most of the funds allocated for this scheme remaine d unutilised. The Ministry should ensure 
that the information of each scheme should reach ev ery nook and corner of the country. 
Therefore, it is imperative that the Ministry consu lts all the necessary authorities so that 
public awareness of all the schemes of the Ministry can be created.                  (Para 16.2) 
 
XVII. GENDER BUDGETING 
 
 The Ministry should have informed the Committee re garding the plans to take up 
child budgeting or not. The Ministry should have pu t forth the plans and action to be taken 
up regarding child budgeting. Mere noting for compl iance will not do any good for the 
children who are one of the most vulnerable sections of the society.                     (Para 17.4) 
 
  

XVIII.     CONCLUSION 
 
 The Committee takes note of the various efforts ta ken up by the Ministry to handle 
various issues relating to welfare of women and chi ldren. However, the Committee observes 
that the Ministry has failed to provide information  and data on various important schemes 
and the some of the information given are not up to  date. The Ministry has adopted a very 
casual approach while replying on the recommendatio ns of the Committee. Many issues and 
challenges regarding the welfare and protection of women and children are in lurch. It is 
hoped that the Ministry adopt serious and concerted efforts in tackling such problems.  
 The Committee is exasperated to note that out of i ts 35 recommendations contained in 
the report, the Ministry of Women and Child Develop ment has merely “noted for 
compliance” on 18 of those recommendations even tho ugh the financial year is coming to an 
end. No steps/action taken by them has been indicat ed in the ATN. Many of the figures 
provided by the Ministry are not up to date and in some cases, figures for the current 
financial year are missing altogether. These do not  speak well of the Ministry and the casual 
approach being adopted by them in implementing various schemes does not bode well for the 
future of women and children of this country. The C ommittee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should start with a new zeal to ensure  that such a important facet of the society 
i.e., women and child development does not suffer d ue to their apathy and urgent steps 
should be taken seriously for the future of the country. 
 The Ministry was mandated to provide the Action Ta ken Note on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Repor t within 90 days of the 
presentation/laying of the Report. However, the Com mittee is anguished to note that despite 
several reminders, the same was received quite late . Hence, the Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should strictly adhere to the stipulated timeframe.                     (Para 18.1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 