PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 242
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON HUMAN  RESOURCE  DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FORTY SECOND  REPORT
ON
THE RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH
DEVELOPMENT BILL, 2011
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)APRIL, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26 APRIL, 2012)TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 26 APRIL, 2012)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26 APRIL, 2012)TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 26 APRIL, 2012)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FORTY SECOND REPORT
ON
THE RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH
DEVELOPMENT BILL, 2011
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26 TH APRIL, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 26 TH APRIL, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................ (ii i)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—6
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ........................ 7—8
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 9—13
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 15 —40

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
(Constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011 )
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Vacant
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri M. Rama Jois
6. Vacant
7. Shri N.K. Singh
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
10. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
12. Shri Kuvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
13. Shri Mirza Mehboob Beg
14. Shri Sameer Bhujbal
15. Shri P.K. Biju
16. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
17. Shri Suresh Channabasappa Angadi
18. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
19. Shri Rahul Gandhi
20. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
21. Capt. Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad
22. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
23. Kumari Saroj Pandey
24. Shri Prasanna Kumar Patasani
25. Shri Balakrishna Khanderao Shukla
26. Shri Ashok Tanwar
27. Shri Joseph Toppo
28. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
29. Shri P. Viswanathan
30. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
31. Shri Rathod Ramesh
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and
Forty second Report of the Committee on the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development
Bill, 2011*.
2. The Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Bill, 2011 was introduced in the
Lok Sabha on 21 December, 2011. In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker,
Lok Sabha referred** the Bill to the Committee on 16 January, 2012 for examination and report.
3. Views and comments of the Ministry were taken note of while formulating the observations
and recommendations of the Committee. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry
of Youth Affairs & Sports in its meeting held on 29 March, 2012.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in two sittings held on 29 March and 19 April, 2012.
5. The Committee, while drafting the Report, relied on the following:–
(i) Background Note on the Bill and Note on the clauses of the Bill received from the
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports.
(ii) Presentation made and clarifications given by the Secretary, Ministry of Youth Affairs
& Sports.
(iii) Feedback received from the Ministry on the questionnaires with the issues raised by the
Members during the course of the oral evidence; and
6. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the Bill and adopted the same in its meeting
held on 19 April, 2012.
7. For facility of reference, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been
printed in bold letters at the end of the Report.
OSCAR FERNANDES
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
April 19, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary
Chaitra 30, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development.
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II Section 2 dated 21 st December, 2011.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 49210 dated 16 th January, 2012.

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Bill, 2011 was referred to the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development for
examination and report by 15 March, 2012.
1.2 The Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Bill, 2011 seeks to declare the
Institute as an Institution of National Importance and to provide for its incorporation and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
1.3 The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill reads as follows:-
“The Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development is an autonomous organisation
under the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and is fully funded by the Government of
India. The said Institute is the nodal agency for youth training, youth work and youth
development in the country for rural and urban youth. The Institute is also functioning as
a Centre for documentation. information and publication pertaining to youth development
and provides institutional training for the personnel working in the field of youth.
The University Grants Commission team visited the Institute on the 3rd and 4th September
2008, and recommended for conversion of the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth
Development as a Deemed-to-be University under section 3 of the University Grants
Commission Act, 1956. Accordingly, the Ministry of Human Resource Development issued a
notification on the 23rd October. 2008 granting the Institution Deemed-to-be University
status under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
The National Youth Commission Report, 2002, commissioned by the Government of India,
highlighted that the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development as the premier
National Institute should offer academic courses and research facilities for the youth
programmes and functionaries so that there would be cadre of competent professionals for
youth development. The Planning Commission in its Eleventh Five Year Plan Report
advised that the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development should be developed
as an apex institution with the status of National Youth University in the country.
The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports constituted a Mentor Group on the 28th March,
2011 with the terms of reference to convert the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth
Development at Sriperumbudur into an institution of national importance by an Act of
Parliament. While examining the functioning of the existing Institute, the Mentor Group
recommended that the conversion of the present Institute into an institution of national
importance was imperative for addressing the vital needs and challenges of youth
development in the country.”
1.4 The Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development, an autonomous body registered
as a society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, was set up in March, 1993 with an
objective of undertaking advanced study and applied research in the field of youth related activities
and to function as a resource agency for youth programmes, policies and implementation strategies.
The institute is the nodal agency for youth training, youth work and youth development in the
country for rural and urban youth. The institute is also functioning as a centre for documentation,
information and publication pertaining to youth development and provides institutional training for
the personnel working in the field of youth.

2
1.5 The Secretary, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports in her deposition before the Committee
informed that the main purpose of bringing this legislation was to make RGNIYD which had been
in existence since 1993 and serving as an apex training institution for the youth organizations,
particularly Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan and National Service Scheme an institution of national
importance. The Secretary pointed out that in India’s population of more than 1.2 billion, the key
demographic feature was the 550 million youth between the age group of 13-35. So the youth
cohort of 13 to 35 years was going to be not only the object but also the subject of all
development planning in this country. Adequate health, education and skills had to be ensured for
this group so that they became active and productive members of the workforce. This group was
going to include producers, consumers, employees, employers, entrepreneurs, workers, students as
well as teachers. So from that perspective, an institute of national importance would signal the
importance or the critical centrality of this group for all planning and programmes that would be
taken up by the Ministry in the next two Five Year Plans. The Secretary, further informed the
Committee that the Twelfth Five Year Plan would begin next year and it was the right juncture to put
this institute at the centre stage of all youth activities in the country and to focus on the challenges
that face youth development and all development planning under all sectors of the economy.
1.6 Another important aspect which needed to be taken into consideration was that out of 39
institutions of national importance in the country, 35 institutions were in the domain of technology,
3 institutions were pertaining to the medical domain and 1 institution meant for language development.
It was emphasized that there was no institute in India working solely on the youth domain and youth
specific issues. Against this backdrop, RGNIYD, as an institution of national importance would not
be a mere degree granting institution but would be a multi-sectoral and multi-dimensional institute,
empowered to perform its role as a resource agency and a ‘think thank’ to take necessary policy
initiatives, research, evaluation, advocacy, training etc. with focus on youth development.
1.7 The new status would enable the Institute to achieve horizontal and vertical growth over
a specified time-line. Horizontal growth would mean its expansion in terms of more departments,
centres and programmes, institutional networking and collaborations, strengthening the national
youth resource centre, assuming regional leadership and moving towards global partnerships in the
core area of youth development and allied spheres. Vertical growth of the institute would include
evolving unique and innovative courses, developing a world-class curriculum, attracting international
students, enriching resource materials, practice of innovative teaching strategies, adopting rigorous
evaluation system, initiating exchange programmes and enhancing student support system.
1.8 The Committee took note of the fact that on 18 January, 2010, Deemed-to-be University
status was withdrawn from 44 institutions including RGNIYD by the Government. It was clarified
that the UGC guidelines clearly indicated that the unique status of these institutions as ‘De-novo
institutions’ in the emerging areas with the promise of excellence, not yet fulfilling the prescribed
guidelines of UGC may be inspected by a UGC committee which may recommend to the
Government for granting them provisional status of Deemed-to be University. This provisional
status would be subject to confirmation after five years on the basis of the performance report of
the UGC Review Committee done annually for a five year period. Due to a PIL filed in the Supreme
Court in 2006, an Expert Committee was appointed on 4 June, 2009 to review such universities.
In addition, Tandon Committee was appointed on 6 July, 2009 which recommended derecognition
of 44 Deemed Universities, including RGNIYD. A point worth mentioning was that at the time of
Tandon Committee giving its Report on 18 October, 2009, RGNIYD had not completed even one
annual review despite the provision of being reviewed annually for a period of five years as
prescribed by UGC guidelines for De-novo category Deemed Universities. It was also pointed out
that the PIL filed in the Supreme Court pertained to profit-making and private commercial
institutions, while RGNIYD was an autonomous body under the Ministry and fully funded by the
Government.

3
1.9 Committee’s attention was also drawn to the following observations of the UGC appointed
Expert Committee which visited the Institute on 18-19 February, 2010:–
“In view of the specific observations with regard to availability of qualified faculty,
infrastructure available in term of buildings. Laboratory, equipment, common facilities,
discussions with the Director and interaction with the Faculty, non-teaching staff, students,
villagers and information furnished by  the institute and verification of documents, the
Committee is satisfied with its functioning and the program made by the university since it
was conferred the status of a Deemed -to be University on 23 October 2008.”
The Committee notes that the Supreme Court directed that the Deemed University status of
all the 44 Deemed Universities including RGNIYD may continue.
1.10 The Committee is happy with the initiative taken by the Ministry in bringing this
legislation conferring the status of the Institute of national importance on the RGNIYD. This
is the first of its kind institution for youth development in the country. As the Apex Institute
at the national level, it works in close cooperation with the NSS, NYK and other Youth
Organizations in the implementation of the training programmes. The Institute is a nodal
agency for training youth and a facilitator of youth development activities in rural, urban and
also tribal areas. It functions as a vital resource centre co-ordinating training, orientation,
research, extension and outreach initiatives for State, Central Governments and national level
Youth organizations. It offers inter-disciplinary, multi-dimensional field-based expertise in a
number of areas through training, faculty exchange and consultancy. The Committee is of the
opinion that with the kind of activities for youth development being undertaken by RGNIYD,
such institution should have its presence all over the country. By channelizing youth into
productive activities, the incidence of youth being misguided into anti-national and anti-social
activities will show a declining trend. The Committee welcomes this legislative initiative
having the mandate of strengthening the youth welfare and guidance activities through a well-
structured, fully empowered set up, having its presence in the entire country.
1.11 The Committee observes that all the concerned Ministries were consulted by the Ministry
before bringing out the proposed legislation. By and large, it has been found acceptable by all the
Ministries, with few suggestions coming from Ministries like Finance and HRD. Suitable changes
have, accordingly, been made in the Bill.
1.12 The Committee was informed that the Ministry had constituted a Mentor Group on 28
March, 2011 on the following terms of reference:
– to examine the feasibility of converting the existing institution deemed to be
– university to an Institution of national importance by an Act of Parliament;
– to make recommendation for broadening the mandate of the institution;
– to make recommendations on the financial requirements of such conversion; and
– to suggest the template of the governing structure of such an institution.
1.13 The Committee observes that this nine-member Mentor Group had eminent
personalities as its members. The Committee had the opportunity to go through the
comprehensive report touching upon all aspects of governance so far as RGNIYD is
concerned. The Committee hopes that the suggestions/recommendations with regard to the
vision, mission of the proposed Institute, its administrative structure, governing structure,
infrastructure and financial requirements will work as the/guiding force for the Ministry
while shaping the existing Institute as an Institution of national importance. The

4
Committee also takes note of the draft Bill prepared by the Mentor Group. The Committee
finds that, by and large, both the Bills, i.e. the one drafted by the Mentor Group and the
one before the Committee are the same. However, in a few provisions, formulations made
by the Mentor Group have not been found acceptable by the Ministry. The Committee would
like to point out that, broadly speaking, the proposed legislation before it does not need any
major amendment. Suggestions given by the Ministries of Finance and HRD have been
suitably reflected in the proposed legislation. Only exception would be those provisions
commented upon by the Mentor Group not agreed to by the Ministry.
II The Committee makes the following observations/recommendations on some
provisions of the Bill.
Clause 6 : Objects of the Institute
2.1 Clause 6 deals with the objects of the Institute. The Committee observes that in both the
Bills, the one prepared by the Mentor Group and the one before the Committee, six objects on
similar aspects have been included. The only difference is that the same have been enumerated in
an extensive manner in the Bill of the Mentor Group. With a view to having more clarity, the
Committee is of the view that the first two objects as given in the draft of the Mentor
Group given below may be replaced in the proposed legislation:
(a) to evolve and achieve an integrated approach to youth development with a view
to prepare and empower the youth for the future by providing action research
inputs for policy formulation, implementing policies through extension and other
programmes, promoting assessment and impact studies and conducting teaching,
training and other academic programmes;
(b) to set up a world class advanced National Youth Resource Centre that will
provide comprehensive and scientifically analysed data on all youth- related
issues and matters, excellent library facilities and professionally produced
documentation and publications.
III Clause7 : Functions of Institute
3.1 Clause 7 deals with functions of Institute. On a comparative analysis of both the Bills, the
Committee observes that the functions as enumerated below have not found place in the proposed
legislation before the Committee:
– in collaboration with Open universities, set up distance learning or education
mechanisms to provide wider access to the academics of the Institute to aspiring
young professionals wishing to take up a career in the field of youth development;
– establish, maintain and manage halls of residences and hostels for students;
– lay down conditions of service including a code of conduct for teachers and other
categories of employees;
– supervise, control and regulate the discipline of all categories of employees and
students of the Institute and to make arrangements for promoting their health and
general welfare;
– receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Central and State
Governments and to receive bequests, donations, grants, borrow money and transfers
of movable or immovable properties from testators, donors. transferors, alumni,
industry or any other person.

5
– function as the nodal centre for all the international youth exchange programmes
mandated by Government and facilitate the youth exchange programmes in
collaboration with multi-lateral and bi-lateral organizations;
– To enter into agreements with international organizations, institutions and universities to
broaden the scope of the youth work and to facilitate knowledge development and
participatory learning.
The Committee is of the view that these functions may also be added in Clause 7.
IV. Clause 12 : Establishment of Executive Council
4.1 Clause 12 enumerates the composition of the Executive Council. The Committee observes
that out of the eleven-member Executive Council, three members, Secretary, Joint Secretary and
JS and Financial Advisor from the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports are Government
representatives. The Committee is of the view that with the Secretary and Joint Secretary
and Financial Advisor from the Ministry already  being designated as members of the
Executive Committee, there seems to be no  rationale for having another Joint Secretary on
the Executive Council.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that Joint Secretary from
the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports may not be nominated to the Executive Council.
4.2 The Committee also takes note of the fact that as per clause 12(3), while nominating the
members of the Executive Council, due representation shall be given to women, different regions
of the country and weaker sections of the community and differently abled persons. While
welcoming the inclusion of these segments of the society in the decision-making body of the
Institute, the Committee feels that their representation has to be made more specific and
effective. The Committee, therefore, recommends that necessary modification may be made
accordingly.
V. Clause 16 : Academic Council
5.1 Clause 16 relates to Academic Council. As per sub-clause (2), the constitution of the
Academic Council, the term of office of its members and its powers shall be such as may be
provided by the statutes. The Committee is of the view that composition of the Academic
Council should be part of the Bill as suggested by the Mentor Group. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that composition of the Academic Council as enumerated in the
draft prepared by the Mentor Group should be made part of the proposed legislation. As in
the case of the Executive Council, the representation of women, different regions of the
country and weaker sections of the community and differently abled persons in the
Academic Council also has to be made more specific and effective.
VI. Clause 18 : Finance Committee
6.1 Clause 18 relates to the Finance Committee. However, composition of the Finance
Committee as well as the term of office of its members and its powers are to be provided by the
statutes. The Committee is of the view that composition of the Finance Committee should be
reflected in the Bill itself. The Committee finds that the Mentor Group has included the same
in its draft Bill. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the inclusion of the same in the
proposed legislation.
VII. Clause 22 : Director
7.1 As per clause 22(5), the Director shall submit annual reports and accounts to the Executive

6
Council. The Committee observes that Annual Report and Audited Accounts of every statutory
body/institution is to be laid on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament. But this provision is
missing in the proposed legislation. The Committee is of the view that such a provision is an
essential component of all such legislations so as to make statutory bodies/institutions
accountable to Parliament. The Committee, therefore, recommends the inclusion of the
same.
8. The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of Bill without any amendments. The
Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the amended
additions as suggested by it.
9. The Committee would like the Department to submit a note with reasons on the
recommendations/suggestions which could not be incorporated in the Bill.

7
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
I. INTRODUCTION
The Committee is happy with the initiative taken by the Ministry in bringing this
legislation conferring the status of the Institute of national importance on the RGNIYD.
This is the first of its kind institution for youth development in the country. As the Apex
Institute at the national level, it works in close cooperation with the NSS, NYK and other
Youth Organizations in the implementation of the training programmes. The Institute is a
nodal agency for training youth and a facilitator of youth development activities in rural,
urban and also tribal areas. It functions as a vital resource centre co-ordinating training,
orientation, research, extension and outreach initiatives for State, Central Governments and
national level youth organizations. It offers inter-disciplinary, multi-dimensional field-based
expertise in a number of areas through training, faculty exchange and consultancy. The
Committee is of the opinion that with the kind of activities for youth development being
undertaken by RGNIYD, such institution should have its presence all over the country. By
channelizing youth into productive activities, the incidence of youth being misguided into
anti-national and anti-social activities will show a declining trend. The Committee welcomes
this legislative initiative having the mandate of strengthening the youth welfare and
guidance activities through a well-structured, fully empowered set up, having its presence
in the entire country. (Para 1.10)
The Committee observes that this nine-member Mentor Group had eminent
personalities as its members. The Committee had the opportunity to go through the
comprehensive report touching upon all aspects of governance so far as RGNIYD is
concerned. The Committee hopes that the suggestions/recommendations with regard to the
vision, mission of the proposed Institute, its administrative structure, governing structure,
infrastructure and financial requirements will work as the guiding force for the Ministry
while shaping the existing Institute as an Institution of national importance. The
Committee also takes note of the draft Bill prepared by the Mentor Group. The Committee
finds that, by and large, both the Bills, i.e. the one drafted by the Mentor Group and the
one before the Committee are the same. However, in a few provisions, formulations made
by the Mentor Group have not been found acceptable by the Ministry. The Committee would
like to point out that, broadly speaking, the proposed legislation before it  does not need any
major amendment. Suggestions given by the Ministries of Finance and HRD have been
suitably reflected in the proposed legislation. Only exception would be those provisions
commented upon by the Mentor Group not agreed to by the Ministry. (Para 1.13)
II. The Committee makes the following observations/recommendations on some
provisions of the Bill.
Clause 6 : Objects of the Institute
With a view to having more clarity, the Committee is of the view that the first two objects as
given in the draft of the Mentor Group given below may be replaced in the proposed legislation:
(a) to evolve and achieve an integrated approach to youth development with a view
to prepare and empower the youth for the future by providing action research
7

8
inputs for policy formulation, implementing policies through extension and other
programmes, promoting assessment and impact studies and conducting teaching,
training and other academic programmes;
(b) to set up a world class advanced National Y outh Resource Centre that will
provide comprehensive and scientifically analysed data on all youth-related
issues and matters, excellent library facilities and professionally produced
documentation and publications. (Para 2.1)
IV. Clause 12 : Establishment of Executive Council
The Committee is of the view that with the Secretary and Joint Secretary and
Financial Advisor from the Ministry already being designated as members of the Executive
Committee, there seems to be no rationale for having another Joint Secretary on the
Executive Council. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that Joint Secretary from the
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports may not be nominated to the Executive Council.
(Para 4.1)
While welcoming the inclusion of these segments of the society in the decision-
making body of the Institute, the Committee feels that their representation has to be made
more specific and effective. The Committee, therefore, recommends that necessary
modification may be made accordingly. (Para 4.2)
V. Clause 16 : Academic Council
The Committee is of the view that composition of the Academic Council should be
part of the Bill as suggested by the Mentor Group. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that composition of the Academic Council as enumerated in the draft prepared
by the Mentor Group should be made part of the proposed legislation. As in the case of the
Executive Council, the representation of women, different regions of the country and
weaker sections of the community and differently abled persons in the Academic Council
also has to be made more specific and effective. (Para 5.1)
VI. Clause 18 : Finance Committee
The Committee is of the view that composition of the Finance Committee should be
reflected in the Bill itself. The Committee finds that the Mentor Group has included the
same in its draft Bill. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the inclusion of the same
in the proposed legislation. (Para 6.1)
VII. Clause 22 : Director
The Committee is of the view that such a provision is an essential component of all
such legislations so as to make statutory bodies/institutions accountable to Parliament. The
Committee, therefore, recommends the inclusion of the same. (Para 7.1)

9
MINUTES

XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the
29th March, 2012 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
3. Shri N.K. Singh
4. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Kuvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
6. Shri Sameer Bhijbal
7. Shri P.K. Biju
8. Shri Suresh Chanbassappa Angadi
9. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
10. Kumari Saroj Pandey
11. Shri Balakrishna Khanderao Shukla
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
13. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
14. Shri Madhu Goud Yashkhi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
LIST OF WITNESSES
I. Minitry of Youth Affairs & Sports
1. Shrimati Sindhushree Khullar, Secretary (Sports)
2. Shri Rakesh Mohan, Joint Secretary (Youth Affairs)
11

12
3. Shrimati Anjali Anand Srivastava, JS & Financial Advisor
4. Shri Rahul Bhatnagar, Joint Secretary (Sports)
5. Shri Mukul Chatterjee, Joint Secretary (Sports)
6. Shrimati Sarda Ali Khan, Joint Secretary (NSS)
7. Shri Michael Vetha Siromony, Director (RGNIYD)
8. Shri R.N. Biswas, Director (IC)
9. Shri D.C.S. Rao, Director (Finance)
10. Shri C. Chinnappa, Director (PYKKA)
II. Sports Authority of India
11. Shri Desh Deepak Verma, Director General
12. Shri Gopal Krishna, Secretary
13. Dr. P.C. Kashyap, Executive Director (Teams)
14. Shri Sanjay Saraswat, Director (P&C)
15. Shri Joe Sebstian, Executive Director (Operations)
16. Shri Raj Kumar Chopra, Director (Finance)
17. Shrimati Meena Bora, Director
III. Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan
18. Shri C.S. Pran, Director
19. Shri S.K. Thakur, Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened for hearing the presentation of the Secretary, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports on
the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Bill, 2011 and ***       ***.
3. The Committee then heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
on the objectives and vision of the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Bill, 2011
along with the reasons for converting the institution into an institution of national importance and
also the status of infrastructure, faculty position and programmes conducted by the Institute. The
Chairman and members raised some queries which were replied to by the Secretary.
4. *** *** ***
5. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.40 
P.M. so meet again on 10 th and 11 th April, 2012.
*** Relate to other things.

13
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the
19th April, 2012 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri N.K. Singh
LOK SABHA
3. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
4. Shri P.K. Biju
5. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
6. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
7. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
8. Kumari Saroj Pandey
9. Shri Prasanna Kumar Patasani
10. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
11. Shri Ramesh Rathod
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to consider and adopt the draft 242 nd Report on the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of
Youth Development Bill, 2011.
3. The Committee, then considered and adopted the draft 242 nd Report on the Rajiv Gandhi
National Institute of Youth Development Bill, 2011 without any modifications.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.05 P.M.
13

ANNEXURES

17
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 130 of 201 1
THE RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH
DEVELOPMENT BILL, 2011
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Declaration of Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development as an institution
of national importance.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
RAJIV G ANDHI N ATIONAL I NSTITUTE  OF Y OUTH D EVELOPMENT
4. Incorporation of Institute.
5. Effect of establishment of Institute.
6. Objects of Institute.
7. Functions of Institute.
8. Institute to be open to all races, creeds, gender and classes.
9. Teaching at Institute.
10. Visitor.
CHAPTER III
A
UTHORITIES  OF THE I NSTITUTE
11. Authorities of Institute.
12. Establishment of Executive Council.
13. Terms of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to members of
Executive Council.
14. Meetings of Executive Council.
15. Powers and functions of Executive Council.
16. Academic Council.

18
CLAUSES
17. Functions of Academic Council.
18. Finance Committee.
19. Functions of Finance Committee.
20. Other authorities.
CHAPTER IV
O
FFICERS  OF THE  I NSTITUTE
21. Officers of Institute.
22. Director.
23. Registrar.
24. Other officers.
CHAPTER V
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT
25. Grants by Central Government.
26. Fund of Institute.
27. Endowment or other funds.
28. Accounts and audit.
29. Pension and Provident Fund.
30. Appointment of staff of Institute.
31. Power to make Statutes.
32. Statutes how to be made.
33. Power to make Ordinances.
34. Ordinances how to be made.
35. Conduct of business by authorities of Institute.
36. Tribunal of Arbitration.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
37. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies.
38. Grant of degrees, etc., by Institute.
39. Sponsored schemes.
40. Meetings of Academic Council and Finance Committee.
41. Power of Central Government to give directions to Institute.
42. Protection of action taken in good faith.
43. Power to make rules.
44. Statutes, Ordinances and notifications to be published in Official Gazette and to be
laid before Parliament.
45. Power to remove difficulties.
46. Transitional provisions.

19
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 130 of 201 1
THE RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH
DEVELOPMENT BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to declare the institution known as the Rajiv Gandhi National
Institute of Youth Development, to be an institution of
national importance and to provide for its incorporation and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rajiv Gandhi National
Institute of Youth Development Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
19
Short title and
commencement.

20
2. Whereas the objects of the institution known as the Rajiv
Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development are such as to make
the institution one of national importance, it is hereby declared that
the institution known as the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth
Development is an institution of national importance.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise reinquires,—
(a) “Academic Council” means the Academic Council of
the Institute;
(b) “appointed day” means the date appointed under
sub-section ( 2) of section 1 for coming into force of this Act;
(c) “Chairperson” means a Chairperson to the Executive
Council referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) of section 12;
(d) “Director” means the Director of the Institute
referred to in clause ( a) of section 21;
(e) “Executive Counci1” means the Executive Council
of the Institute established under section 12;
(f) “existing Institute” means the Rajiv Gandhi National
Institute of Youth Development, Sriperumbudur, established
under the provisions of the Society Registration Act, 1860 and
declared as deemed to be a University under section 3 of the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956, and which is in
existence immediately before the commencement of this Act;
(g) “Fund” means the fund of the Institute to be
maintained under section 26;
(h) “Institute” means the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute
of Youth Development incorporated under section 4;
(i) “notification” means the notification published in the
Official Gazette;
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(k) “Registrar” means the Registrar of the Institute
referred to in section 23;
(l) “Statutes” and “Ordinances” mean the Statutes and
Ordinances of the Institute made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
T
HE R AJIV G ANDHI N ATIONAL I NSTITUTE OF Y OUTH D EVELOPMENT
4.  ( 1) The Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth
Development shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession
and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this
Declaration of
Rajiv Gandhi
National
Institute of
Youth
Development as
an institution of
national
importance.
Definitions.
Incorporation of
Institute.
21 of 1860.
3 of 1956.

21
Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and
shall, by that name, sue and be sued.
(2) The first Chairperson, the first Director and the first
members of the Executive Council and the Academic Council, and
all persons who may hereafter become such officers or members,
so long as they continue to hold office or membership, shall
constitute the Institute.
(3) The headquarters of the Institute shall be in the district of
Kanchipuram, in the State of Tamil Nadu.
(4) The Institute may establish and maintain centres at such
other places in India as it may deem fit.
5. On and from the appointed day and subject to other
provisions of this Act,—
(a) any reference to the existing Institute in any
contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference
to the Institute;
(b) all property, movable and immovable, of or
belonging to the existing shall vest in the Institute;
(c) all rights and liabilities of the existing institute shall
be transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities of, the
Institute; and
(d) every person employed by the existing Institute
immediately before the appointed day shall hold office or
service in the Institute by the same tenure, at the same
remuneration and upon the same terms and condition and with
the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity,
provident fund and other matters as he would have held the
same if this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to
do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until
such tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions are duly
altered by the Statutes:
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable
to such employee, his employment may be terminated by the
Institute in accordance with the terms of the contract with
the employee or, if no provision is made therein in this behalf,
on payment to him by the Institute a compensation equivalent
to three months’ remuneration in the case of permanent
employees and one month’s remuneration in the case of other
employees.
6. The, objects of the Institute shall be,—
(a) to evolve and achieve an integrated approach to
youth development;
(b) to establish a National Youth Resource Centre;
Effect of
establishment of
Institute.
Objects of
Institute.

22
(c) to provide for research and development and
dissemination of knowledge through extension and outreach
programmes;
(d) to act as a nodal agency for capacity building of
stakeholders including youth bodies, organisations and
agencies relating to youth;
(e) to empower youth to participate in inclusive
development and nation building;
(f) to evolve as an institute of advanced study in the
field of youth and to develop such professional excellence as
may be required for the purpose;
(g) to provide for higher education in the field of youth
development through employment-oriented and inter-
disciplinary courses at the post graduate level.
7. Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 6,
the Institute shall,—
(a) develop a “think tank” by way of carrying out
policy research, evaluation and impact analysis on youth
programmes and issues of contemporary and future relevance;
(b) function as a repository of knowledge pertaining to
data on youth;
(c) develop documentation, information and publication
services for youth training and extension;
(d) provide technical advice and consultancy for
formulation of youth related policy and promotion of youth
programme;
(e) build the professional capacity of youth
organisations, both in Government and voluntary sector;
(f) design, develop and conduct appropriate training and
orientation programmes;
(g) conduct seminars, workshops and conferences on
issues relating to youth;
(h) Set up centres for dissemination of academic and
training programmes;
(i) collaborate with national and international university,
centres, institutes and such other agencies relating to youth
training and youth development;
(j) establish programmes of study and research and to
provide for instruction in such branches of study as the
institute deems appropriate;
Functions of
Institute.

23
(k) award, subject to such conditions as the Institute
may determine, degrees, diplomas, certificates or other
academic distinctions or titles at various academic levels;
(l) confer honorary degrees or other distinction awards
followships, scholarships, prizes and medals;
(m) determine, demand and receive fees and other
charges for its courses, programmes and other matters;
(n) conduct and coordinate projects and studies relating
to youth sponsored by by the Government of India and other
developmental agencies;
(o) create with the prior approval of the Central
Government, academic, technical, administrative, managerial
and other posts in the Institute and make appointments thereto
in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Institute,
(p) regulate the conduct of the affairs of the Institute;
(q) supervise and control the discipline of all categories
of employees and students of the Institute;
(r) purchase, hire, lease, exchange or acquire property,
movable or immovable and to construct, alter and maintain
any building or buildings as may be necessary;
(s) to undertake, assist and promote all such activities
conducive or incidental to the attainment of the objectives.
8. ( 1) The Institute shall be open to persons of either sex and
of whatever race, creed, caste or class, physical ability, and no test
or condition shall be imposed as to religious belief or profession in
admitting students, appointing teachers or employees or in any other
connection whatsoever.
(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be
accepted by the Institute which in the opinion of the Executive
Council involves conditions or ob1igations apposed to the spirit and
object of this section.
9. All teaching and other academic activities at the Institute
shall be conducted by or in the name of the Institute in accordance
with the Statutes and Ordinances made in this behalf.
10. ( 1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the
Institute:
Provided that the President may, by order, nominate any
person to be the Visitor and such person so nominated shall hold
office for such term, not exceeding five years as may be specified
in the order and the person so nominated shall exercise the powers
and discharge duties of the Visitor.
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more
persons to review the work and progress of the Institute and to
Institute to be
open to all
races, creeds,
gender and
classes.
Teaching at
Institute.
Visitor.

24
hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to report thereon in such
manner as the Visitor may direct.
(3) Upon receipt of any such report, the Visitor may take
such action and issue such directions as he considers necessary in
respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the
Institute shall be bound to comply with such directions within
reasonable time.
CHAPTER III
A
UTHORITIES  OF THE I NSTITUTE
11. The Institute shall consist of the following authorities,
namely:—
(a) the Executive Council;
(b) the Academic Council; and
(c) such other authorities as may be declared by the
Statutes to be the authorities of the Institute.
12. ( 1) With effect from such date as the Central Government
may, by notification appoint in this behalf, there shall be established
for the purpose of this Act, a central body to be called as the
Executive Council.
(2) The Executive Council shall consist of the following
members, namely:—
(a) an eminent person of academic repute to be
nominated by the Visitor—Chairperson;
(b) an eminent person in the field of Youth Development
to be nominated by the Visitor—Vice-Chairperson;
(c) Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs, Ministry of
Youth Affairs and Sports— ex officio  Member;
(d) Joint Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs,
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports— ex officio  Member;
(e) Director, Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth
Development— ex officio  Member;
(f) Joint Secretary and Financial Adviser, Ministry of
Youth Affaris and Sports— ex officio  Member;
(g) Professor from Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of
Youth Development on rotation—Member;
(h) one eminent sports personality to be nominated by
the Central Government—Member;
(i) one Head from an Academic Institution to be
nominated by the Central Government—Member;
Authorities of
Institute.
Establishment of
Executive
Council.

25
(j) one representative from  the industry to be nominated
by the Central Government from the Federation of Indian
Chamber of Commerce and Industry or Confederation of
Indian Industry by the Central Government—Member;
(k) the Registrar, Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of
Youth Development—Member Secretary.
(3) While nominating the members of the Executive Council
under sub-section ( 2) due representation shall be given to women,
different regions of the country, and weaker to sections of the
community and differently abled persons.
13. (1) The term of office of every member of the Executive
Council shall be for  a period of three years from the date of  his
nomination:
Provided that the term of office of an ex officio member shall
continue so long as he holds the office by virtue of which he is a
member.
(2) The term of office of a member nominated to fill a casual
vacancy shall be further remainder of the term of the member in
whose place he has been nominated.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an out-
going member shall, unless the Central Government otherwise directs,
continue in office until another person is nominated as a member in
his place or until the expiry of one year, whichever is earlier.
(4) The members of the Executive Council, other than ex-
officio members, shall be paid such travelling and other allowances
as may be provided by the Statutes.
14.  ( 1) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside at the
Meetings of the Executive Council and at the Convocation of the
Institute:
Provided that, in his absence, the Vice-Chairperson of the
Executive Council shall preside at the meetings of the Executive
Council.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to ensure that the
decisions taken by the Executive Council are implemented.
(3) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and
perform such other duties as are assigned to him by this Act.
(4) The Executive Council shall meet at least four times in a
year and follow such procedure, in its meetings (including quorum
at such meeting) as may be provided by the Statutes.
15. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Executive
Council shall be responsible for  the general superintendence,
direction and control of the affairs of the Institute and shall also
exercise the powers of the Institute not otherwise provided for by
Terms of office
of, vacancies
among, and
allowances
payable to
members of
Executive
Council.
Meetings of
Executive
Council.
Powers and
functions of
Executive
Council.

26
this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, and shall have the power
to review the acts of the Academic Council and Finance Committee.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of  sub-section ( 1), the
Executive Council shall—
(a) take decisions on questions of policy relating to the
administration and working of the Institute;
(b) lay down policy regarding the duration of the
courses, nomenclature of the degrees and other distinctions to
be conferred by the Institute;
(c) institute courses of study and lay down standards of
proficiency and other academic distinctions in respect of the
courses offered by the Institute:
(d) lay down, with prior approval of the Central
Government policy regarding the cadre structure, qualification,
the method of recruitment and conditions of service of the
teaching and research faculty as well as other employees of
the Institute;
(e) guide resource mobilisation of the Institute and to
lay down policies for utilisation;
(f) consider and approve proposals for taking loans for
purposes of the Institute with or without the security of the
property of the Institute;
(g) make Statutes and to alter, modify or rescind the
same;
(h) consider and pass resolutions on annual report,
annual accounts and the budget estimates of the Institutes for
the next financial year as it thinks fit together with a
statement of its development plans; and
(i) do all such things, not specifically covered under
clauses ( a) to ( h), as may be necessary, incidental or
conductive to the attainment of all or any of the powers
under this section.
(3) The Executive Council shall have the power to appoint
such committees as it considers necessary for the exercise of its
powers and the performance of its duties under this Act.
(4) The Executive Council may, by a specific resolution to
this effect, delegate any of its powers and duties to the Chairperson,
Director, any officer or any authority of the Institute subject to
reserving the right to review the action that may be taken under
such delegated authority.
16. ( 1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic
body of the Institute and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act,
the statutes and the Ordinances, co-ordinate and exercise general
supervision over the academic policies of the Institute.
Academic
Council.

27
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of
office of its members and its powers shall be such as may be
provided by the Statutes.
(3) While nominating members of the Academic Council due
representation shall be given to women, different regions of the
country, weaker sections of the community and differently abled
persons.
17. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the
Ordinances, the Academic Council shall have the control and general
regulation, and be responsible for the framing of the Ordinances,
maintenance of standards of instruction, education and examination
in the Institute and shall exercise such other powers and perform
such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the
Statutes.
18. ( 1) There shall be a Finance Committee of the Institute
which shall be the principal financial body of the Institute.
(2) The constitution of the Finance Committee, the term of
office of its members and its powers shall be such as may be
provided by the Statutes.
(3) While nominating the members of the Academic Council
due representation shall be given to women, different regions of the
country, weaker sections of the community and differently abled
persons.
19. The Finance Committee shall perform the following
functions, namely:—
(a) to scrutinise the accounts and budget estimates of
the Institute and to make recommendations to the Executive
Council;
(b) to scrutinise the proposals for new expenditure on
account of major works on purchases;
(c) to. scrutinise re-appropriation statements and audit
notes and make recommendations thereon to the Executive
Council;
(d) to review the finances of the Institute from time to
time and have concurrent audit conducted whenever
necessary; and
(e) to give advice and make recommendations to the
Executive Council on any financial questions affecting the
affairs of the Institute.
20. The constitution, powers and functions of the other
authorities, as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of
the Institute, shall be such as may be provided by the Statutes.
Functions of
Academic
Council.
Finance
Committee.
Functions of
Finance
Committee.
Other
authorities.

28
CHAPTER IV
OFFICERS  OF THE I NSTITUTE
21. The Institute shall consist of the following officers,
namely:—
(a) the Director;
(b) the Registrar; and
(c) such other officers as may be declared by the
statutes the officers of the Institute.
22. ( 1) The Director of the institute shall be appointed by the
Visitor for a period of three years in the manner specified in sub-
sections ( 2) and ( 3) on such terms and conditions of service as
may be provided by the Statutes:
Provided that the first Director shall be appointed by the
Central Government on such terms and conditions as it deems fit,
for a period not exceeding six months from the appointed day.
(2) The Director shall be appointed by the Visitor from a
panel of three persons with outstanding academic qualifications as
recommended by a Search Committee constituted by the Central
Government for that purpose.
(3) The Search Committee referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall
consist of three members, one each to be nominated by the
Executive Council, the Central Government and the Visitor.
(4) The Director shall be the principal academic and executive
officer of the Institute and shall be responsible for the proper
administration and academic performance of the Institute and for
imparting of instruction and maintenance of discipline therein.
(5) The Director shall submit annual reports and accounts to
the Executive Council.
(6) the Director shall exercise such other powers and perform
such other duties as may be assigned to him by the Act, the
Statutes and the Ordinances.
23. ( 1) The Registrar of the Institute shall be appointed in
such manner and on such terms and conditions as may be provided
by the Statutes and shall be the custodian of records, common seal,
the funds of the Institute and such other property of the Institute
as the Executive Council shall commit to his charge.
(2) The Registrar shall act as the Member-Secretary of the
Executive Council, the Academic Council and such committees as
may be provided by the Statutes.
(3) The Registrar shall be responsible to the Director for the
proper discharge of his functions.
Officers of
Institute.
Director.
Registrar.

29
(4) The Registrar shall exercise such other powers and
perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by this Act,
the Statutes or by the Director.
24. The manner of appointment, emoluments, powers and
duties of the other officers of the Institute shall be such as may be
provided by the Statutes.
CHAPTER V
F
INANCE, A CCOUNTS AND A UDIT
25. The Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute
in each financial year such sums of money and in such manner
as it may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this
Act.
26. ( 1) The Institute shall maintain a fund to which shall
be credited—
(a) all monies provided by the Central Government;
(b) all fees and other charges levied and collected
by the Institute;
(c) all monies received by the Institute by way of
grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or
transfers; and
(d) all monies received by the Institute in any other
manner or from any other source.
(2) All monies credited to the Fund shall be deposited in
such banks or invested in such manner as may be decided by
the Executive Council.
(3) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the
expenses of the Institute including expenses incurred in the
exercise or its powers and discharge of its duties under this Act.
27. Without prejudice to the provisions contained in
section 26, the Institute may,—
(a) set up an endowment fund with an amount of
one hundred crore rupees to be maintained in the Public
Account and other fund for a specified purpose; and
(b) transfer monies from its fund to the endowment
fund or any other fund.
28. (1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts,
including the balance sheet, in such form as may be prescribed by
the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
Other officers.
Accounts and
audit.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Fund of
Institute.
Endowment or
other funds.

30
(2) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any expenditure
incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by
the Institute to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the
accounts of the Institute shall have the same rights, privileges and
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India has in connection with the audit of the
Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and
other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the
Institute.
(4) The accounts of the Institute as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person
appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and
the Central Government shall cause the same to be laid before each
House of Parliament.
29. ( 1) The Institute shall constitute for the benefits of its
employees, including the Director, such pension, insurance and
provident fund scheme as it may deem fit, in such manner and
subject to such conditions as may be provided, by the Statutes.
(2) Where any such provident fund has been so constituted,
the Central Government may declare that the provisions of the
Provident Funds Act, 1925 shall apply to such fund as if it were a
Government Provident Fund.
30. All appointments of the staff of the Institute, except that
of the Director, shall be made with prior approval of the Central
Government and in accordance with the procedure laid down in the
Statutes,—
(a) by the Executive Council, if the appointment is
made on the academic staff in the post of Assistant Professor
or above or if the appointment is made on the non-academic
staff in any cadre, the maximum of the pay-scale for which
is the same or higher than that of an Assistant Professor; and
(b) by the Director, in any other case.
31. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the formation of departments of teaching and other
academic units;
(b) the institution of fellowships, scholarships,
exhibitions, medals and prizes;
(c) the classification of posts, terms of office, method
of appointment, powers and duties and other terms and
19 of 1925.
Power to make
Statutes.
Appointment of
staff of
Institute.
Pension and
provident fund.

31
conditions of service of the officers of the Institute including
the Chairperson, the Director, the Registrar and such other
officers as may be declared as officers of the Institute by the
Statutes;
(d) the constitution, powers and duties of the
authorities of the Institute referred in clause ( c) of section 11;
(e) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or
officers of the Institute;
(f) the code of conduct, disciplinary actions thereto for
misconduct including removal from service of employees on
account of misconduct and the procedure for appeal against
the actions of an officer or authority of the Institute;
(g) the conferment of honorary degrees;
(h) the establishment and maintenance of halls,
residences and hostels;
(i) the authentication of the orders and decisions of the
Executive Council;
(f) any other matter which by this Act is to be, or may
be, provided by the Statutes.
32. (1) The first Statutes of the Institute shall be framed by
the Central Government with the approval of the Visitor, and a copy
of the same shall be laid as soon as may be, after it is made, before
each House of Parliament.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-
section ( 1), the Executive Council may, from time to time, make
new or additional Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes in
the manner hereafter in this section provided.
(3) A new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any
amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require the previous approval
of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold such assent or
remit it to the Executive Council for consideration.
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an
existing Statute shall have no validity unless it has been assented to
by the Visitor.
33. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the
Ordinances of the Institute may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the admission of the students to  the Institute;
(b) the reservation in admission to various courses or
programmes of the Institute for the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and other categories of persons;
(c) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees,
diplomas and certificates awarded by the Institute;
Statutes how
to be made.
Power to
make
Ordinances.

32
(d) the conditions under which students shall be
admitted to the degree, diploma and certificate courses and to
the examinations of the Institute and the eligibility conditions
for awarding the same;
(e) the conditions of award of fellowships,
scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;
(f) the conditions and manner of appointment and duties
of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;
(g) the conduct of examinations;
(h) the maintenance of discipline among the students of
the Institute;
(i) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the
institute and for admission to the examinations of degrees of
the Institute;
(j) the conditions of residence of students of the
Institute and the levying of the fees for residence in the halls
and hostels and of other charges; and
(k) any other matter which by this Act or the Statute
is to be, or may be, provided by the Ordinances.
34. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances
shall be made by the Academic Council.
(2) All Ordinances made by the Academic Council shall have
effect from such date as it may direct, but every Ordinance so
made, shall submitted, as soon as may be, to the Executive Council
and shall be considered by the Executive Council at its next
succeeding meeting.
(3) The Executive Council shall have power by resolution to
modify or cancel any such Ordinance and such Ordinance shall
from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or
cancelled, as the case may be.
35. The authorities of the Institute may have their own rules
of procedure, consistent with the provisions of this Act, the Statutes
and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that
of the committees, if any, appointed by them and not provided for
by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.
36. (1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the
Institute and any of its employees shall, at the request of the
employee concerned or at the instance of the Institute, be referred
to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by
the Institute, one member nominated by the employee, and an
umpire appointed by the Visitor.
(2) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and shall not
be questioned in any court.
Ordinances how
to be made.
Conduct of
business by
authorities of
Institute.
Tribunal of
Arbitration.

33
(3) No suit or proceeding shall lie in any court in respect of
any matter, which is required by sub-section ( 1) to be referred to
the Tribunal of Arbitration,
(4) The Tribunal of Arbitration shall have power to regulate
its own procedure.
(5) Nothing contained in any law for the time being in force
relating to arbitration shall apply to arbitrations under this section.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
37.  No Act of the Institute or Executive Councilor or
Academic Council or any other body set up under this Act or the
Statutes, shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution
thereof; or
(b) any defect in the election, nomination or
appointment, of a person acting as member thereof; or
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the
merits of the case.
38. Notwithstanding anything contained in the University
Grants Commission Act, 1956 or any other law for the time being
in force, the Institute shall have power to grant degrees and other
academic distinctions and titles under this Act:
Provided that the nomenclature of any degree to be granted
by the Institute shall be notified by the University Grants
Commission with the prior approval of the Central Government.
39. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, whenever
the Institute receives funds from any Government, the University
Grants Commission or any other agency including industry
sponsoring a research scheme, a consultancy assignment, a
teaching, programme or a chaired professorship or a scholarship, to
be executed or endowed at the Institute,—
(a) the amount received shall be kept by the Institute
separately from the fund of the Institute and utilised only for
the purpose of the scheme:
Provided that any money remaining unutilized under this
clause shall be transferred to the endowment fund set up under
section 27; and
(b) the staff required to execute the same shall be
recruited in accordance with the terms and conditions
stipulated by the sponsoring organisation with prior approval
of the Central Government:
3 of 1956.
Acts and
proceedings not
to be invalidated
by vacancies.
Grant of degree,
etc. by Institute.
Sponsored
schemes.

34
Provided that the principles laid down in the General Financial
Rules, 2005 shall be followed for approval of sponsored schemes
funded by the Central Government.
40. The Academic Council and the Finance Committee shall
meet at such times and follow such procedure, in its meetings
(including quorum at such meetings) as may be provided by the
Statutes.
41. (1) The Central Government may give such directions, as
it may deem necessary, to the Institute for the effective
administration of this Act and the Institute shall comply with such
directions.
(2) In case of dispute between the Institute and the Central
Government, in connection with the exercise of its powers and
discharge of its functions by the Institute under this Act, the
decision of the Central Government on that dispute, shall be final.
42. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any
officer or employee of the Institute for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the
provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.
43. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification, make
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which the books of account
of the Institute shall be maintained under sub-section ( 1) of
section 28;
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, prescribed.
44. (1) Every rule made by the Central Government and every
Statute and every Ordinance made or notification issued under this
Act shall be published in the Official Gazette.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government, every Statute
and every Ordinance made or notification issued under this Act shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
Statute, Ordinance or notification or both Houses agree that the
Statute, Ordinance or notification should not be made or issued, the
Statute, Ordinance or notification shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
Meetings of
Academic
Council and
Finance
Committee.
Statutes,
Ordinances and
notifications to
be published in
Official Gazette
and to be laid
before
Parliament.
Power of Central
Government to
give directions
to Institute.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Power to make
rules.

35
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
Statute, Ordinance or notification.
(3) The power to make the Statutes, Ordinances or
notifications shall include the power to give retrospective effect
from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act,
to the Statues, Ordinances, notifications or any of them but no
retrospective effect shall be given to any Statutes, Ordinance or
notification so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person
to whom such Statute, Ordinance or notification may be applicable.
45. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions or give such
directions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as
appears it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after
the expiry of two years from the date of commencement of this
Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
46. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,—
(a) the Advisory Board and the Executive Council of the
existing Institute functioning as such immediately before the
commencement of this Act shall continue to so function until
an Executive Council is constituted for the Institute under this
Act, but on the constitution of a new Executive Council under
this Act, the members of the Advisory Board and Executive
Council holding office before such constitution shall cease to
hold office; and
(b) until the first Statutes and the Ordinances are made
under this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances of the existing
Institute, or notification as in force, immediately before the
commencement of this Act, shall continue to apply to the
Institute in so far as they are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Transtional
provisions.

36
36
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development
was established at Sriperumbudur in the State of Tamil Nadu in
March, 1993 by the Government of India as it Society registered
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 with an objective of
undertaking advanced study and applied research in the field of
youth related activities and to function as a resource agency for
youth programmes, policies and implementation strategies.
2. The Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development is
an autonomous organisation under the Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports and is fully funded by the Government of India. The said
Institute is the nodal agency for youth training, youth work and youth
development in the country for rural and urban youth. The Institute
is also functioning as a Centre for documentation. Information and
publication pertaining to youth development and provides institutional
training for the personnel working in the field of youth.
3. The University Grants Commission team visited the
Institute on the 3rd and 4th September 2008, and recommended for
conversion of the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth
Development as a Deemed-to-be University under section 3 of the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956. Accordingly, the Ministry
of Human Resource Development issued a notification on the
23rd October, 2008 granting the Institution Deemed-to-be University
status under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
4. The National Youth Commission Report, 2002,
commissioned by the Government of India, highlighted that the Rajiv
Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development as the premier
National Institute should offer academic courses and research
facilities for the youth programmes and functionaries so that there
would be cadre of competent professionals for youth development.
The Planning Commission in its 11th five Year Plan Report advised
the the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development should
be developed as an apex institution with the status of National Youth
University in the country.
5. The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports constituted a
Mentor Group on the 28th March, 2011 with the terms of reference
to convert the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development
at Sriperumbudur into an institution of national importance by an Act
of Parliament. While examining the functioning of the existing
institute, the Mentor Group recommended that the conversion of the
present Institute into an Institution of national importance was
imperative for addressing the vital needs and challenges of youth
development in the country.

37
6. In view of the above, it has been proposed to make a
legislation titled as the “Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth
Development Bill, 2011” which, inter alia, provides for the
following, namely:—
(a) declare the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth
Development as an Institution of national importance;
(b) incorporate the Rajiv Gandhi National institute of
Youth Development and to transfer all  properties, rights and
liabilities of the existing Institute to the Rajiv Gandhi National
Institute of Youth Development;
(c) the institute shall discharge the following objects
and functions, namely:—
(i) to evolve as an Institute of advanced study in
the field of youth and achieve an integrated approach to
youth development;
(ii) to undertake action and applied research in
the field of youth related activities;
(iii) to empower youth to participate in inclusive
development and nation building;
(iv) to provide for higher education in the field of
youth development through employment-oriented and
inter-disciplinary courses at the post graduate level;
(v) to carry out policy research, evaluation and
impact analysis on youth programmes and issues of
contemporary and future relevance;
(vi) to function as a repository of knowledge
pertaining to data on youth;
(vii) to build the professional capacity of youth
organisations, both in Government and voluntary sector;
(d) the Institute shall be open to all races, creeds,
gender and classes;
(e) the President of India shall be the Visitor of the
Institute;
(f) the authorities of the Institute shall be the Executive
Council, the Academic Council and such other authorities as
may be declared by the Statutes;
(g) the Officers of the Institute shall be the Director,
the Registrar and such other officers as may be declared by
the Statute;
(h) the Statutes of  the Institute shall be made by the,
“Executive Council”;

38
(i) the Ordinances of the Institute shall be made by me
“Academic Council”;
(j) refer the disputes between the Institute and its
employees to a “Tribunal of Arbitration” for resolution.
7. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various
provisions contained in the Bill.
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NEW D ELHI; AJAY MAKEN.
The 15th December, 2011.

39
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development is
an autonomous organisation of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports, registered as a Society under the Societies Registration Act,
1860 fully funded by the Government of India. The Institute was
sanctioned grants-in-aid to the tune of Rs.11.90 crores during the
financial year 2011-12 for meeting its recurring and non-recurring
expenditure.
2. Clause 25 of the Bill provides that for the purpose of
enabling the Institute to discharge its functions efficiently under the
proposed legislation, the Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the
Institute in each financial year such sums of money and in such
manner as it may think fit for being utilised.
3. Clause 26 of the Bill provides for the maintenance of a
Fund by the Institute and the Fund shall be applied towards meeting
the expenses of the Institute.
4. Clause 27 of the Bill provides that the Institute may set up
an endowment fund with an amount of one hundred crore rupees to
be maintained in the Public Account and any other fund for a
specified purpose and transfer monies from its Fund to the
endowment fund or any other fund.
5. The expenditure would be met from the Consolidated Fund
of India through the budgetary provision under the Department of
Youth Affairs.
6. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India, both recurring and non-recurring.
39

40
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 32 of the Bill empowers the Central
Government, to frame, with the previous approval of the Visitor; the
First Statutes of the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth
Development Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that the
Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional
Statutes or amend or repeal such Statues. Sub-clause ( 3) of the said
clause provides that a new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any
amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require the previous approval
of the Statutes or any assent thereto or withhold such assent or
remit it to the Executive Council for consideration. Sub-clause ( 4)
of the said clause provides that a new Statute or a Statute amending
or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless it has
been assented to by the Visitor.
2. Clause 33 of the Bill enumerates the matters in respect of
which Ordinances of the Institute may be made by the Academic
Council of the Institute. The Ordinances are subject to the
provisions of the proposed legislation and the Statutes. The matters
in respect of which Ordinances may be made, inter alia, include the
admission of the students to the Institute, the courses of study to
be laid down for all degrees and diplomas of the Institute; the
conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree or
diploma courses and to the examinations of the Institute, the
conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions,
medals and prizes, etc.
3. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 34 of the Bill lays down the
procedure as to how the Academic Council of the Institute shall
make such Ordinances.
4. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 43 of the Bill empowers the
Central Government to make, by notification in the Official Gazette,
rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause ( 2) enumerates the matters in respect of which such
rules may be made. These matters shall include the form and
manner in which the books of account of the Institute shall be
maintained under sub-clause ( 1) of section 28 and any other matter
which is required to be, or as may be, prescribed.
5. The matters in respect of which the notification, the first
Statutes, the further Statutes or the Ordinances may be made are
matters of administrative or procedural detail and it is not
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of
legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.