PARLIAMENT 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December 
TWO HUNDRED 
 
Performance of National Sports 
Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT  OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL OPMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
December , 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST  REPORT 
Performance of National Sports Development Fund 
And 
Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons  
(Part II)  
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22 nd  December, 2015) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22 nd  December, 2015) 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO. 
271  
REPORT  
Development Fund  

PARLIAMENT 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL 
 
TWO HUNDRED 
Performance of National Sports 
Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT  OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL OPMENT  
 
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST  REPORT 
 
Performance of National Sports Development Fund 
And 
Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons  
(Part II)  
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22 nd  December, 2015) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22 nd  December, 2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
December , 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT  
Development Fund  

C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ….................... .......................................  (i)-(ii) 
2.         PREFACE..................................................................................................................  (iii) 
3.  LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS ……….......…................. ...........................................  (iv) 
4.  REPORT............................................ .............................................…............................         
4. *OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -  AT A GLANCE ...   
5. *MINUTES........................................ ...................................................... ................    
6. *ANNEXURES...................................... ............................................................ ..   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
*Appended on printing stage 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 31 st  August, 2015) 
 
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya      Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
3. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
4. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
5. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
7. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
8. Shri Sharad Pawar 
9. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa 
10. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat 
12.  Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman 
13.  Shri C.R. Chaudhary 
14.       Shrimati Bhawana Gawali Patil 
15.       Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha 
16 .       Shri  Anant Kumar Hegde 
17.       Prof. Chintamani Malviya 
18.       Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra 
19.       Shri Chand Nath 
20.       Shri Hari Om Pandey 
21.       Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
22.       Shri N.K. Premachandran 
23.       Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
24.       Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran 
25.       Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
26.       Shri M.I. Shanavas 
27.       Dr. Nepal Singh 
28.       Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh 
29.       Shri P.R. Sundaram 
30.       Shri Ajay Tamta 
31.       Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher  
  
 
 
 
 
(i) 

SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri K.P. Singh, Additional Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director 
Shri R.K. Mecolt Singh, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
  

P R E F A C E 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamen tary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authorized by the  Committee, present this Two Hundred and 
Seventy-first Report of the Committee on the ‘Perfo rmance of National Sports Development Fund 
and Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons’- Part II.  
2.  The Committee visited the Sports Complex/Stadiu m and Regional Centres of Sports 
Authority of India and NIS at Hyderabad, Sonepat, C handigarh and Patiala.  The Committee also 
heard the views of representatives of NMDC, ECIL, B DL, HFL, Mishradhatu Nigam Ltd., BHEL 
FCI, IRCTC, MMTC, NBCC, SAIL, NSCL, NHPC, IFCI, Sta te Bank of Hyderabad, Andhra 
Bank, Punjab National Bank, State Bank of Patiala a nd Punjab and Sindh Bank along with the 
authorities of Department Sports and officials of S tate Governments of Andhra Pradesh, 
Telangana, Punjab, Haryana and Union Territory of C handigarh to  have an idea about their 
contribution to the National Sports Development Fund and to explore how they can promote sports 
and recruitment of sportspersons.  
3.  The Committee considered the Draft Report on th e subject and adopted the same in its 
meeting held on the 18 
th  December, 2015.  
4.  For facility of the reference, observations and  recommendations of Committee have been 
printed in bold letters at end of Report.  
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
December 18, 2015 
Agrahayana 27,1937 (Saka) 
 
 
DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

ABBREVIATIONS  
1. NMDC National Mineral Development Corporation 
2. ECIL  Electronic Corporation of India Limited 
3. BDL  Bharat Dynamics Limited 
4. HFL  Hindustan Fluorocarbons Limited 
5. MIDHANI Mishradhatu Nigam Limited 
6. BHEL  Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited 
7. FCI  Food Corporation of India  
8. IRCTC  Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporat ion Limited 
9. MMTC Metals and Minerals Trading Corporation of Ind ia 
10. NBCC  National Buildings Construction Corporation 
11. SAIL  Steel Authority of India Limited 
12. NSCL  National Seeds Corporation Limited 
13. NHPC  National Hydroelectric Power Corporation 
14. IFCI  Industrial Finance Corporation of India 
15. SAI  Sports Authority of India 
16. SRC  Sports Resource Centre 
17. NSNIS  Netaji Subhash National Institute of Sports 
18. CPSEs  Central Public Sector Enterprises 
19. PSUs  Public Sector Undertakings 
20. PSBs  Public Sector Banks 
21. PNB  Punjab National Bank 
22. SBH  State Bank of Hyderabad 
23. PwD  Persons with Disabilities 
24. NSDF  National Sports Development Fund 
25. CSR  Corporate Social Responsibility   
 
 
(iv) 
  

REPORT  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1. The Country has such a big untapped sports poten tial, however compared to it, the 
performance of sports is abysmal.  Modern competiti ons are about the physical conditioning and 
not merely about the physic ability and Indians nee d to understand it soon to be able to compete at 
the International level.  Possessing a good built a lways gives an edge but at the end of the day it is  
about the skills you possess and the zeal to succee d in the sport.  Conceptualize at the Chinese, 
Japanese or Koreans, they don’t necessarily possess  an intimidating body structure like that of the 
Europeans and African.  But they have dished out st erling performances across various sports and 
have acquired positions in the Olympic tables.  So lack of physic ability is not the bane for the 
Indian players. Physical conditioning have become v ery important in contact sports today and it 
has become imperative for sportspersons to be assisted by the specialists. 
 
2. Our players are very hard working and eager to l earn.  Their dedication is just impeccable 
and all they need is the correct guidance and mento rs, of course, under whom they can sharpen 
their skills on the right path and direction.  The exposure and much needed experience can 
definitely turn the tables for the sports aspirants .  The management, players, training, etc., i.e. 
every aspect, of the preparation needs to be in top  notch.  We need to improve the area of our 
attitude towards the sport.  The high time is for c oncentrating on three very essential aspects, viz.,  
fitness levels, lifestyle and mental conditioning.  In past the Department of Sports/SAI have failed 
deplorably in all these three areas which culminated in wiping out medal winning hope for India in 
championships like Olympics, etc., compared to othe r Countries of world like U.S., Germany, 
England, China, Japan, Korea, etc. 
 
3. With modern sports being highly competitive, the  use of modern infrastructure, equipment 
and advanced scientific support has changed the sce nario of sports at the international level. 
Keeping in line with the growing demands for advanc ed infrastructure, equipment and scientific 
support, the Government has taken several initiativ es and is providing the necessary assistance to 
sportspersons by way of training and exposure in in ternational competitions backed up with 
scientific and equipment support. 

 
4. It is well known that sports is, primarily, a St ate subject in Country.  The Department of 
Sports along with the Sports Authority of India and , of course, National Sports Federations, 
however, have been playing vital role for promotion  of excellence in sports as well as broad- 
basing of sports.  The availability of adequate spo rts facilities including appreciable sports 
infrastructure throughout the Country is a basic ne cessity for broad-basing of sports.  In the 
direction of funding in sports sector, the Central Government had established the National Sports 
Development Fund (NSDF) in 1998 under the Charitabl e Endowment Act, 1890.  The Committee 
views the performance of NSDF as an important aspec t in mobilizing resources for development 
of sports and in this perspective, interacted with PSEs/PSBs as well as other stakeholders in the 
field of sports, which are described in the succeeding paras 
 
(I)  VISIT TO HYDERABAD 
 
5. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Co mmittee on Human Resource 
Development undertook a study visit to Hyderabad fr om 27 
th  to 29 th  October, 2015 to assess 
the performance of National Sports Development Fund  (NSDF), promotion of sports and 
recruitment of sportspersons in Public Sector Banks and Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs). 
 
6. The Committee held discussions with functionarie s of CPSEs such as  the CMDs of Mishra 
Dhatu Nigam Limited,  Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL) , Electronics Corporation of India 
Limited (ECIL); Director (Production) of  National Mineral Development Corporation  (NMDC) 
Limited and MD of Hindustan Fluorocarbons Limited o n performance of National Sports 
Development Fund  (NSDF) and Promotion and Recruitment of Sportspersons in PSEs.   
 
7. The Director, NMDC submitted that NMDC has been contributing towards promotion of 
Sports in the Country under CSR and also through sp onsorship of various events.  Under the CSR 
activities of the Company, some of the notable acti vities through which NMDC was contributing 
to the promotion of sports were: 
a. Promotion of Handball and Archery in Chhattisgarh b y way of Annual Financial 
Support to the State Handball and Archery Associati ons to the tune of Rs. 15 lacs and 
Rs. 20 lacs respectively. 

b. Supporting various village level sporting events th rough Panchayats on an annual basis 
surrounding NMDC's villages. 
c. Promoting Rural Sports in the villages around its Bailadila and Nagarnar Projects. 
d. Sponsorship of World Hockey Legue tournament being held in Raipur in 
November/December, 2015, as Principal Sponsor in-pa rtnership with Government of 
Chhattisgarh at an amount of Rs. 3.0 crores. 
 
8. It was further added as a part of its policy for  promotion of 'sports and sponsorship of 
various events, NMDC has also contributed towards s ponsorship of various tournaments of 
National and International levels in Cricket, Footb all, Volleyball, Hockey, Tennis, Badminton, 
Wresting, Chess, Snooker, Carrom, Handball, Fencing  etc.  NMDC has also sponsored an 
expedition to Mt Everest under the aegis of Indian Mountaineering Foundation.  The Committee 
came to know that the NMDC is sponsoring Ms. Snehalata Singh Rajawat, who is a member of the 
Indian National Shooting Team, for participation in  Trap Shooting in the 2016, Rio Olympics.  
NMDC has also sponsored Shri Prashant Gupta for par ticipation in the 2015, Thailand Open 
Fencing Championship.  During the last three years,  the expenditure incurred by NMDC in 
promotion of sports activities at National and International level is as follows: 
 
Year Under CSR By way of Sponsorship 
 
2013-14 
 
Rs. 53.11 lacs Rs. 1,49,13,000/- 
2014-15 
 
Rs. 201.31 lacs Rs. 57,18,000/- 
2015-16 (till September) 
 
Rs. 300.51 lacs Rs. 29,95,000/- 
 
9. Besides, NMDC also provides sports facilities to  its employees and conducts various intra 
and inter Project Tournaments.  NMDC has been condu cting Inter-Project Tournaments (IPT) 
regularly for promoting internal Sports and Games i n four Indoor games viz., Carroms, Chess, 
Badminton, Table Tennis, and seven outdoor games vi z., Volleyball, Lawn Tennis, Kabaddi, 
Football, Ball Badminton, Cricket and Hockey. The t alented sportspersons are encouraged to 
participate in various district/state level tournam ents also.  NMDC also sponsors its Corporate 
teams for various tournaments in Cricket, Football,  chess etc.  An amount of about Rs. 50 lacs are 
spent every year for promotion of sports amongst th e employees and in the schools run by NMDC.  
The Committee was informed that although NMDC is co ntributing to the promotion of sports as 

mentioned above, no fixed percentage of CSR funds a re earmarked for the same.  However, funds 
have not been a constraint in NMDC's efforts in promotion of sports. 
 
10. The Committee was apprised that the NMDC has be en contributing in its own way for 
promotion of sports in the Country.  Some of the steps that it has taken are: 
 
A) Sports encouragement for NMDC Employees: 
 
/head2right NMDC, having its Head Quarter at Hyderabad, has Maj or Projects in Kirandul, 
Bacheli and Nagarnar (Chhattisgarh), Panna (Madhya Pradesh), Donimalai 
(Karnataka) and Paloncha (Telangana).  NMDC has bee n conducting Inter- Project 
Tournaments (IPT) regularly for promoting internal sports and games in four indoor 
games viz.  Carroms, Chess Badminton, Table Tennis and seven outdoor games viz.  
Volleyball, Lawn Tennis, Kabaddi, Football, Ball Ba dminton, Cricket and Hockey.  
Besides, our employees will also participate in Dis trict and State Level in 
concerned States. 
/head2right NMDC is a member of All India Public Sector Sports Promotion Board since 2011-
12 for promotion of various sports and contributes Rs. 1.5 lakhs per annum. 
 
B) Sports encouragement for Outsiders 
 
/head2right Various Sports: NMDC has provided financial assistance to various o rganization 
in the fields of Golf, Wrestling, World Snooker Cha mpionship, Kalinga Lancers 
(Odisha) All India Level Football Tournament at Luc know, Corporate Cricket 
Tournament, Times Badminton at Hyderabad, Odisha Pr emier League (Odisha 
Cricket Association), Davis Cup Tennis Team, CK Nai du Inter School Cricket 
Tournament, etc.  
/head2right All India Tournament of NMDC Cup: NMDC has conducted All India Football 
Tournament in 2012 at Bacheli, and in 2015 at Kiran du.  All India Cricket 
Tournament in 2012 and 2014 at Kirandul and also Al l India Volleyball 
Tournament at Bachelin in 2015.  
/head2right Sports Promotion in Chhattisgarh :  Handball is very popular in Chhattisgarh.  
Among the Gond Population of Adivasis, Archery is a lso a popular event.  Every 
year NMDC is sponsoring Handball and Archery events  being conducted by State 
Associations of Chhattisgarh Government.  
/head2right Setting up of Sports Complex:  NMDC is in the process of setting up a Sports 
Complex in Jagdalpur near its upcoming Steel Plant at Nagarnar, for encouraging 
sports in the District.  This sports complex will h elp in developing sports in the 
area. 
 

It was brought to the notice of the Committee that as of today, NMDC's recruitment policy does 
not envisage any percentage of reservation for sportspersons.  NMDC being a Central Government 
PSU, follows Department of Public Enterprises (DPE)  Guidelines with respect to recruitment, 
which is in conformation to the Hon'ble Supreme Cou rt judgment in this regard. However, it was 
submitted to the Committee that budding sportspersons are encouraged by the Company. 
 
11. It was further added that NMDC is a Mining Comp any and its Mines are situated at remote 
locations.  All recruitments in group C and D posts  are done at local level.  The recruitments in the 
Mines are made primarily for mining operations.  Th e reservation provisions in its recruitment 
policies are as per the Presidential Directives and various instructions issued by the Government of 
India and NMDC's recruitment policy does not envisa ge any percentage of reservation for 
sportspersons.  However, it also encourages budding  sportspersons, who apply for posts in the 
Company.  The Committee was apprised that, as a par t of its endeavor to promote sports, NMDC 
has a two-tier Sports Promotion Board.  At the Corporate level, the Sports Committee is chaired by 
the Corporate Head of Personnel and comprises repre sentatives of Management and Workmen 
from its units.  NMDC's mines in Bailadila are situ ated in pre-dominantly tribal area in 
Chhattisgarh.  The reservation provisions in its re cruitment policies are as per the Presidential 
Directives and various instructions issued by the G overnment of India.  Further, NMDC helps in 
conducting various sporting events in the Units, wh ere the local tribal populace also participates.  
Many tribal employees also participate in the inter  and Intra-Project Tournaments being organized 
by NMDC.  It was also submitted to the Committee th at as NMDC has no presence in the North 
East, as of now, a scheme exclusively for North Eas t Region has not been made. The setting up of 
a sports University in North East is a welcome step  and will provide a platform to conquer 
challenges and optimize opportunities.  Having no b usiness connections to that region, NMDC did 
not have any interface with the upcoming Sports Uni versity so far.  No Authority from the 
University has approached NMDC so far, for such an interface.   
 
12. The Chief Managing Director, Bharat Dynamics Li mited submitted to the Committee that 
BDL has made a policy for recruitment of outstandin g Sports personnel with an objective to 
encourage sports activities.  A Sports Committee is  in existence, with the Chairman being a senior 
official at the level of General Manager/Executive Director/Director.  BDL has identified three 
games viz., Cricket, Foot Ball and Ball-badminton a nd recruited players of outstanding caliber in 

these games over the years.  Till date, BDL has rec ruited 49 sports personnel and as of now, 32 
sportsmen are on rolls of the Company. The players are given time off every day to practice and 
nurture their skills. The players are given special  leave along with incurring expenditure to 
represent the Company and State Teams both at State  and National Level 
Tournaments/Championships.  Further the sports pers onnel were provided with sports-gear every 
year in their respective games.  The efforts of BDL  has resulted in BDL teams winning numerous 
State/National level tournaments, besides the players of BDL were also selected to represent senior 
state teams to participate in Senior National Championships. The brief details are as given under: 
 
o 3 Players represented AP/Hyderabad State Cricket Te am in Sr. National 
Championship. 
o 7 Players represented Hyderabad State Football Team  in Sr. National Football 
Championship. 
o 6 players represented Hyderabad State Ball Badminto n Team in Sr. National 
Championship. 
o One player, Captain of the Hyderabad Sr. National S tate Team in Ball Badminton 
for 9 years. 
o One player, Captain of the Hyderabad Jr. National State Team in Football. 
o Two players were conferred "Star of India" Award fo r outstanding performance in 
Sr. National Ball Badminton Championship. 
o Two players in Football conferred "Best Player" awa rd in Sr. National 
Championship. 
o 'A' Division Champions in Cricket. 
 
13. The Committee was further informed that every y ear as a part of Sports Development 
activities sports coaching camps are being organize d by BDL to train the children in Cricket, Foot 
Ball and Ball Badminton.  Children/Students from ne arby colonies/Schools are also allowed to 
participate in these coaching camps.  Some of the C hildren were selected for State Teams in 
Cricket and Ball Badminton.  Employees of BDL were encouraged to participate in May Day 
celebrations in various Sports and Games conducted by AP State Labour Department and won 
many laurels for BDL in Ball Badminton, Foot Ball a nd Athletics.  As a part of sports promotion 
activities, BDL is also encouraging CISF personnel in conducting of Sports and Athletics Meets at 
National Level/Zonal Level, organized by CISF Units  in BDL. At BDL Kanchanbagh Unit, an 
Indoor Stadium for Badminton is constructed in the year 2015 in the Company premises for the 

benefit of Employees and their children.  In anothe r unit at Bhanur all sports facilities for playing 
both outdoor and indoor games are provided in the T ownship for promoting sports amongst 
Employees and their children. 
 
14. The CMD, Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (Midhani) s ubmitted to the Committee that, with 
an annual turnover of around Rs. 650 crore and a pr ofit over Rs. 100 crore, the Company utilizes 
most of the recources for expansion and up-gradatio n of operational facilities. However as a PSU 
responsive to the society and its stake holders, also take up various initiatives in the area of Health, 
Education, promotion of Sports to encourage the you ths. Midhani organized two state level Ball 
badminton and Volley ball tournaments to encourage/  to promote the sports culture under CSR.  
Midhani team won A-institution league cricket champ ionship and regularly participates in 
tournaments organized by HCA.  Preference is also g iven to sportspersons in recruitment in 
conformity to the extant Government guidelines.  As  a part of overall development in the field of 
Health and education, funds are being allocated based on the need assessment for sports promotion 
particularly in Government Schools.  Fund allocatio n varies from year to year, based on need 
assessment instead of fixed percentage.  As part of  CSR-policy of the Company, promotion of 
sports activities has been identified as one of the  objectives and, accordingly, projects have been 
identified to promote sports.  Preference to the sp ortspersons is being given as per the extant 
directives issued by the Government of India from time to time.  A play ground is being developed 
to promote sports culture amongst the youth in the neighborhood. 
 
15. The MD of the Hindustan Fluorocarbons Limited ( HFL) submitted to the Committee that 
in the past the Company had organized inter-Public Sector sports at Hyderabad, wherein HFL 
employees participated in various sports events and some of them reached State level competitions 
also.  Subsequent to 2006, the sports event was sto pped due to financial crunch faced by the 
Company.  Further, due to poor financial position a nd sickness, it does not have the necessary 
resources to take up promotion of sports nor is the re any recruitment in the Company.  Here, it is 
also relevant to mention that HFL is a small PSU wi th present manpower strength of 150 only, 
which is planned to be further reduced to 110 throu gh grant of VRS for improving the company's 
performance.  The company had recruited sportsperso ns while recruiting manpower in the initial 
stages of commencement of its operations in 1987.  Subsequently, that quota could not be 

maintained due to poor financial position of the co mpany, grant of VRS and retirement of the 
employees. 
 
16. The officiating CMD of ECIL informed the Commit tee that under Corporate Social 
Responsibility, ECIL has adopted 19 schools in Rang a Reddy District, in the state of Telangana, 
which is declared as Backward District by the Plann ing Commission.  In addition to the above, 
two more schools are adopted in Chittor District ne ar Renigunta, in the state of Andhra Pradesh.  
ECIL has got its own Welfare Fund Committee, headed  by Senior Executive, at the level of Head 
of the Division, to look after the promotion of Spo rts and cultural activities within ECIL.  ECIL 
has an excellent Sports Complex consisting of crick et stadium and indoor stadium to encourage 
the sports activities.   
 
17. It was also apprised that instructions are give n to Interview Committees, to give 
preferential treatment to sports persons in the Int erviews, when recruitment is done in Group ‘C’ 
category.   Presently, though, there is no fixed pe rcentage of funds, for sports activity under CSR, 
necessary funds are allotted to the schools adopted  by ECIL, depending on their requirement.  
ECIL comes under Ministry of Department of Atomic E nergy.  The Department of Atomic Energy 
has its own policy, wherein every year, 25 lakh are  spent for promotion of sports activities.  In 
addition, each unit of DAE including ECIL spends Rs . 5 lakh per year.  The guidelines issued by 
the Govt. is followed with regard to sanction of sp ecial casual leave etc. for employees 
participating in various sports events.  ECIL is co ming under Ministry of Department of Atomic 
Energy, where DAE constituted DAE Sports and Cultur al Committee, to look after the sports 
activities of all the units of DAE.   
 
18. From the deliberations of the Committee with CP SUs, it has come to notice that 
CPSUs are not adequately familiar with the existenc e of the National Sports Development 
Fund (NSDF) and they are by and large linking  the NSDF with CSR activities.  The 
Committee, therefore, directs the Department of Spo rts as well as the Sports Authority of 
India to take all possible measures immediately to educate all the CPSUs on the difference 
between NSDF and their role in CSR so that funds ca n be mobilized for NSDF without any 
further delay.  The Committee notes that the way th e CPSUs are participating on 
development and promotion of sports can be made mor e rationalized and contributing to the 

broad-basing of National Sports.  The Committee als o notes with anguish that this issue was 
also pointed out in its pervious Report on the same  subject, however, no action seems to have 
been taken in this regard and in case the awareness  and familiarity about the NSDF among 
the CPSUs continue to languish as on date, the very  purpose of the NSDF would be defeated 
and the Department of Sports /Sports Authority of I ndia would be responsible for the failure 
on their parts to popularize the same.  
19. The Committee also held discussions with the MD , State Bank of Hyderabad and MD and 
CEO (Additional Charge), Andhra Bank on the aspects  of performance of National Sports 
Developments Fund (NSDF) and Promotion and Recruitm ent of Sportspersons in PSBs. These 
discussions were also held with the representatives  of the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, 
Department of Sports inclusive of Sports Authority of India (SAI). The representatives of the 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services were also present in the meeting. 
 
20. The Managing Director of State Bank of Hyderaba d submitted before the Committee that : 
 
/head2right Bank recruited sportspersons with good track record 
/head2right Bank has a cricket team of 16 players recruited under sports category 
/head2right Bank has a Kabaddi team of 11 players recruited under sports category 
/head2right Bank recruited 6 chess players under sports quota and 
/head2right Bank also recruited one sports man representing sailing sports. 
 
The Managing Director of State Bank of Hyderabad hi ghlighted Other initiatives of the Bank to 
Promote Sports like :- 
 
/head2right SBH is a member of Hyderabad Cricket Association and Telangana Kabaddi Association. 
/head2right SBH regularly pays membership fee to these associat ions for development of sports in the 
area. 
/head2right Some of the players are acting as coaches for vario us local team representing State and 
District levels. 
/head2right The cricket team has been regularly participating i n all local tournaments/league 
championships. 
/head2right Similarly, the Kabaddi team has been participating in many local and outside tournaments. 
/head2right The chess players play tournaments all over India r egularly and the Bank pays there 
tournament fees. 

/head2right The sportsperson representing sailing sport is perm itted time off for practice and special 
leave for tournaments.. 
 
21. The MD of Andhra Bank also submitted that they have always been in the forefront of 
promoting the cause of sports.  Towards this end, t heir Bank has been recruiting persons excelling 
in certain disciplines of Sports outside the normal  recruitment. And the Bank submitted their 
Policy related to recruitment of sportspersons as follows:- 
Bank has a full-fledged cricket team and a Kabaddi team comprising of eminent players recruited 
under the sports quota.  One sportsman representing  sailing sports was also recruited.  These 
players play various tournaments throughout the year at National/State level.  Thus they contribute 
to the promotion of sports.  Some of these players have represented and are representing the 
Country in various international and state level to urnaments.  Bank facilitates for their 
participation in these tournaments.  Need based rec ruitment is done from time to time.  As per 
guidelines sportsperson can be active in the team t ill attaining the age of 35 years.  After 35 years,  
they are replaced with new recruits under sports qu ota.  Fresh persons are recruited periodically to 
maintain the required strength for the team. 
The MD of Andhra Bank further informed that on the funds earmarked for development of sports, 
Bank has been incurring expenditure for the following: 
/head2right Match Allowance to Cricket Players, Kabaddi Players , and Entry Fee to Chess 
Players. 
/head2right Expenditure towards payment of Annual Subscriptions  to Hyderabad Cricket 
Association, Telangana Kabaddi Association, and All  India Public Sector Sports 
Promotion Board. 
/head2right Providing Sports kit to the players. 
/head2right Meeting the expenditure towards travelling and clot hing to the players who 
participates in sports events at various places.   
 
Thus the total expenditure incurred towards the abo ve activities is borne by the Bank without any 
specific limit. 
 
22. The Committee was further informed that Bank ha s been recruiting sportspersons, who 
have excellent track record.  The Selection process  is as per the policy adopted by Banks Sports 
Board/All India Public Sector Sports Board.  As per  the policy, a cap of 1% of the total 
recruitment is fixed for recruitment of sportspersons.  Players recruited under sports quota can play 

for the Banks' team up to the age of 35 years, with  relaxation of five years at the discretion of the 
Bank.  Sportspersons who are 35/40 years of age and  above as the case may be treated as Brand 
Ambassadors of the Bank to promote Banks' various f inancial products and act as liaison officers. 
However, fresh players are being recruited under sports quota.  
 
23. The Committee came to know that at present Andh ra Bank has 33 players (16 players in 
Cricket, 11 players in Kabaddi, 5 players in Chess and 1 person in Sailing) who have been 
recruited by the Bank under sports quota representi ng the Bank in various sports disciplines.  In 
view of formation of Public Sector Banks' Sports Bo ard, Andhra Bank has become a member of 
the Board and is regularly contributing to these or ganizations for various activities taken up by 
them towards promotion of sports.  Bank has been pa ying annual subscriptions to this sports board 
which is taking care of sports development among al l Public Sector Undertakings. The cricket 
team has been regularly participating in all local tournaments/ league championships. Similarly our 
Kabaddi team has been participating in many local a nd outside tournaments. Our chess players 
play tournaments all over India regularly.  The spo rtsperson representing sailing sport is also 
taking part in various tournaments organized all ov er India.  All the above players are granted 
time-off and special leave for taking part in the sports activities.  The expenditure incurred by them 
towards travel, stay, sports kit is borne by the Ba nk.  Andhra Bank has regular teams in Cricket 
and Kabaddi with the players who were selected under sports quota based on their performances in 
the respective sports.  Some of the cricket players , who have shown exceptional performances 
consistently, were given out of turn promotions. 
24. The Policy related to out-of-turn promotions of  sportspersons in Andhra Bank is as 
follows: 
 
Out of Turn Promotions given by the Bank: 
 
 
Sl. No. Sport Year  Cadre 
 
1 Cricket 2007-08 Clerical to JMGS - I 
2 Cricket 2015-16 Clerical to JMGS - II 
3 Cricket 2015-16 JMSG to MMGS - II 
 
It was also informed about the facilities provided to Sportspersons as follows:- 
 
/head2right Bank is permitting time-off to the teams for practice. 

/head2right Bank is sanctioning special leave to the players for participation in tournaments. 
/head2right Match allowance, travelling expenses and boarding e xpenses are also reimbursed by 
the Bank as per eligibility in the respective scale /cadre to all these players when they 
represent our Bank. 
/head2right Bank is providing sports kit, Clothing, sports equi pment to sportspersons once in 2 
years. 
/head2right Bank has also hired two playgrounds for Cricket and Kabaddi teams for practice. 
 
 
25. The Committee, after its deliberations with PSB s, feels that though there are Sports 
Control Boards in these Banks, yet they are not awa re of the requirement for contribution to 
the National Sports Development Fund for promotion of excellence in sports, as well as 
board-basing of sports. The Committee notes that th e Department of Sports and the Sports 
Authority of India have not properly familiarized N SDF to them and the role required from 
them in this regard.   The Committee appreciates th e periodic encouragement given by 
Banks to sports as well as sportspersons in the for m of holding tournaments/sports events,   
cash awards, contribution as sponsorships, etc.  Ho wever, co-ordination with Department of 
Sports/SAI is lacking.  The Committee recommends th at Department of Sports/SAI should 
make concerted efforts in co-ordinating with them i n promotion of sports in the perspective 
of extant National Sports Policy and encouraging th em to make contribution to the National 
Sports Development Fund. 
 
26. The Committee also interacted with the represen tative of State Government of Andhra 
Pradesh and was informed about the new initiatives taken by the Government like: 
• Introduction of New Sports Policy 
• Universalization of Sports in School Education.  
 Strengthening of infrastructure in residential schools  
 Training of PETs. 
 Identification of Latent talent among School Children 
 Introducing Report card system for Sports in Schools. 
• To Promote Optimal utilization of Sports Infrastructure 
 Convergence with department of Higher Education to locate the New 
Infrastructure in Universities and Colleges. 
• Design of Stadiums should be changed with commercial viability for maintenance  

• Revival of existing Stadia under PPP mode 
• Strengthening of District Sports Authority Cadre St rength which includes engaging 
professional Coaches 
 
27. The Committee was further informed about the St ate’s sports related development and 
recruitment as:- 
• The Government of Andhra Pradesh sanctioned 177 Min i Stadiums in the year 2013-14.  
Out of which, works have been started in 52 stadia.  
• A total amount of Rs. 35.00 crore was sanctioned and released under Capital Outlay. 
• The total amount required to complete the works in these 52 stadiums is Rs. 85.00 Crore. 
• There is a deficit of Rs. 50.00 crore.  The same ma y be sanctioned to complete the ongoing 
52 works. 
 
 
28. The Committee notes that the State Governments gets fund assistance for promotion 
of sports from the Central Government through the D epartment of Sports and the need and 
identification of projects are made under different  extant schemes.  The Committee 
recommends that it would be an appreciative move if  the Department of Sports and the SAI 
interact with the State Governments for encouraging  the recruitment of sportspersons in 
vacancies arising out in the domain of State Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana 
covering their autonomous units as well.  The Commi ttee directs to provide a status note in 
this regard from the Department of Sports within a month.  
 
29. The Committee visited GMC Balyogi Athletic Stad ium and interacted with authorities on 
facilities for sportspersons and development and ma intenance of sports infrastructure and the 
interaction was also made with sportspersons /coach es.  The focus was also made on Sports 
Training Centre (STC) being operated by Sports Authority of India. 
 
 
30. The Committee attention was drawn to Gymnastics  students of Hyderabad, who are taking 
coaching in Sports Authority of India Centre. It wa s pointed out that recently this SAI centre 
including Hostel was shifted from Saroornagar Indoo r Stadium, LB Nagar to Gachibowli except 
sports of Gymnastics and Badminton.   Nearly 30 stu dents are taking coaching in Gymnastics as 
day boarders and 10 students (State and National Le vel medalists) are residing in SAI Hostel to 

take coaching while continuing their studies in nea rest schools at LB Nagar.  It was informed that 
due to shifting of this centre to Gachibowli, these  10 students are facing severe problem to attend 
the college, practice, and for mess due to lack of accommodation. They had requested Regional 
Director and Deputy Director, SAI to facilitate the m at Saroornagar Indoor Stadium for their 
training, at least for this academic year. However,  no response has been received from their end. 
Now these students are facing hardship due to lack of accommodation, as they have to attend the 
college for their education at Saroornagar and then  to rush back to report at Gachibowli for their 
training and practice.  They all belong to very poo r families.  It was bought to the notice of the 
Committee that though these students are pursuing g ymnastics since eight years, due to the 
prevailing conditions they are being forced to leav e the game. It was, therefore, requested to help 
the students to survive in this game while continuing their studies. 
 
31. The Committee took serious note of this fact.  The Committee feels that these budding 
sportspersons who have been pursuing the Gymnastics  from the very young age need to be 
nurtured and encouraged.  The Committee is surprise d to note this sorry state of affairs in 
management and recommends that the respective autho rities of SAI are required to take 
cognizance of the plight of budding Gymnastic sport spersons and make sure that these 
students are shifted back to the Saroornagar Indoor  Stadium or should be provided hostel 
facilities at Gachibowli itself so that they pursue their studies and games simultaneously. 
 
II. VISIT TO SONEPAT 
 
32. The Committee also undertook a study visit to S onepat on 18 
th  November, 2015 to 
assess the performance of National Sports Developme nt Fund (NSDF), promotion of sports 
and recruitment of sportspersons in Public Sector B anks and Public Sector Undertakings 
and PSUs. 
 
33. The Committee visited Ch. Devi Lal Northern Reg ional Centre (NRC), Bahalgarh 
(Sonepat) to see the facilities and infrastructures available there and had interactions with Coaches, 
Officials of SAI and eminent/promising Sportspersons.  
 
34. The Committee came to know that SAI Northern Re gional Centre was established in June, 
1998 and started functioning from Netaji Subhash Na tional Institute of Sports (NS NIS), Patiala. 

In October, 1991, the office of Regional Centre was  shifted to Chandigarh. Subsequently, in June, 
2005, this Office was shifted from Chandigarh to it s present location in Sonepat, on a complex, 
which has an approx. area of 83 acre, where various  sports facilities have been developed and the 
States of Haryana and Delhi come under the administ rative jurisdiction of the NRC, Sonepat. The 
SAI Training Centres (STC) coming under the jurisdiction of the NRC, Sonepat are as follows: - 
i) STC, Bhiwani 
ii) STC, Hissar 
iii) STC, Kurukshetra 
iv) STC, NRC, Sonepat, and 
v) STC, Bawana (Delhi) 
 
35. It was also informed that since 2009, this Cent re has been identified by SAI as a Wrestling 
Hub for training of wrestling probables for preparation of Indian Teams for participation in various 
prestigious International competitions. It has prod uced Olympic Medalists like Shri Sushil Kumar 
and Shri Yogeshwar Dutt in Wrestling and Shri Vijender Singh in Boxing. In the last Asian Games 
held at Incheon, Shri Yogeshwar Dutt, Sh. Bajrang and Sh. Narshingh Yadav brought laurels to the 
Country by winning Gold, Silver and Bronze medals r espectively. Apart from this there are 
several; wrestlers who have achieved excellence at the International level. Apart from other 
facilities, the facilities directly related to Sports that are available at NRC, Sonepat as follows: - 
I) Play Field Facilities 
 
Sl. No. Particulars Numbers 
1. AC Wrestling Hall  One 
2. Swimming Pool One 
3. Synthetic Athletic Track One 
4. Athletic Track (Grassy) One 
5. Football Field (Grassy) One 
6. Synthetic Hockey Surface One 
7. Hockey Ground (Grassy) One 
8. Volleyball Court (clay) Two 
9. Kabaddi Court (clay) Two 
10. Basketball Courts (Cemented) Two 

 
II) Accommodation 
 
Sl. No. Particulars Numbers 
1. 200 Bedded AC Hostel being 
used for National Coaching 
Camps  
One 
2. 90 Bedded AC Hostel being used 
for National Coaching Camps  
One 
3. 90 Bedded Non-AC Hostel for 
housing STC inmates  
One 
 
III) Other Infrastructure 
 
Sl. No. Particulars Numbers 
1. Sports Injury Centre  One 
2. Fitness Centre for STC/COE 
Trainees 
One 
 
IV) Physical Fitness Facilities 
 
Sl. No. Particulars Numbers 
1. Techno Gym One 
2. Sauna Bath Three 
3. Ice Bath One 
4. Steam Bath One 
  
36. It was further submitted that at present there are a total of 475 Residential Trainees (406 
Boys and 69 Girls) and 461 Non-Residential Trainees  (416 Boys and 45 Girls) under NRC, 
Sonepat. Apart from this, there are 12 Akharas adopted by NRC, Sonepat having a total strength of 
192 wrestlers. Moreover, under the Come and Play Sc heme, 135 Boy Trainees in STC-Bhiwani; 
32 Boy Trainees in STC-Kurukshetra; 224 Boy Trainee s and 34 Girl Trainees in STC-Sonepat; 
and 120 Boy Trainees and 21 Girl Trainees in STC-Hi ssar are undergoing training in various 
sports disciplines available there. Finally, there are 62 Coaches in Haryana and 77 in Delhi for 
various Disciplines of Sports posted under SAI, NRC, Sonepat. 
The following Academies are being proposed to be op ened up by the respective National 
Sports Federations with Corporate Sector participation : - 

i) National Boxing Academy at Rohtak 
ii) National Athletics Academy for Throws at Rohtak 
iii) National Wrestling Academy at NRC, Sonepat 
During the interactions, the Committee was informed  about the preparation being made for 
the forthcoming Olympics. The Committee also had a firsthand experience of the sprawling Sports 
Complex comprising Athletics Tracks, Wresting facil ities and also the Hostel facilities provided 
for the Sportspersons.  
 
37. The Committee felt that the facilities of Wrest ling and Boxing are praise worthy, 
which is responsible for this Centre bringing out s o many World renowned Sports-persons. 
However, this excellence needs to be replicated for  other Sports disciplines too. The 
Committee feels that the Athletics Tracks and turf for hockey need to be improved and 
brought at par with the International level incorpo rating the latest technology and sports 
facilities. The Committee also felt that in view of  the forthcoming Rio Olympics in 2016, the 
Sports Authorities should focus more on the medal p rospective sports disciplines like 
Wrestling, Boxing, Weight-lifting, Athletics etc., where India traditionally have been strong, 
though other disciplines should also be given its f air share of attention so as to bring laurels 
for the Country. 
 
 
III VISIT TO CHANDIGARH AND PATIALA 
 
38. The Committee also undertook a study visit to C handigarh and Patiala from 18 
th  to 
21 st  November, 2015 to assess the performance of Nation al Sports Development Fund 
(NSDF), promotion of sports and recruitment of spor tspersons in Public Sector Banks and 
Public Sector Undertakings and PSUs. 
 
39. The Committee visited Netaji Subhash National I nstitute of Sports (NS NIS), Patiala to see 
the facilities and infrastructures available there and had interactions with Coaches, Officials of SAI 
and eminent/promising Sportspersons.  
38. The NS NIS  Patiala, which is also Asia's largest Sports Instit ute, is housed in the Palatial 
monumental Building and sprawling lawns built by th e erstwhile Maharaja of Patiala, whose 
descendants dedicated this complex for the promotio n of sports to the people of India. This 

Institute is popularly known as the "Mecca" of Indi an Sports and has produced Coaches of high 
caliber. National Institute of Sports was establish ed by the Government of India on 7th May, 1961 
with the objective of developing sports in the Coun try on Scientific lines and to train the Coaches 
in different sports disciplines. The Institute was renamed as Netaji Subhas National Institute of 
Sports (NSNIS) on 23rd January, 1973. 
 
40. The Institute is housed in an area of 268 acres . The Institute has enormous facilities for 
academic programmes & sports training and 4 hostels  for the comfortable stay of the students, 
national players and coaches. The Institute is havi ng 115 rooms which houses the Office, Library, 
Museum, Class Rooms and Staff Club. There is one Guest House with Lounge & Conference Hall. 
Department of Sports Medicine is providing all medi cal assistance to the Players, Students and 
Staff. The sports training facilities are of Intern ational standard comprising of Gymnasium, 
Swimming Pool, Indoor Halls, Cycling Velodrome, Squ ash Courts, Conditioning Units, Hockey 
Fields (Grass & synthetic), Athletic Track (Cinder & synthetic) & Out Door Courts. For the 
recovery of players well-maintained Sauna Bath, Ste am Bath and Hydrotherapy facilities are 
available. 
41. The Institute was merged with the Sports Author ity of India (SAI ), in 1987. NIS Patiala is, 
at present, the Academic Wing and the main academic  centre of SAI. The Institute also has three 
academic sub-centres at the SAI Regional Centres, v iz., the SAI Netaji Subhas Southern Centre, 
Bangalore, and SAI Netaji Subhas Eastern Centre, Kolkata and LNCPE, Thiruvananthapuram. The 
Institute also conducted some regular and periodic sports education programmes at these centres 
and some other selected centres, from time to time.  Besides being the academic centre of the SAI, 
the Institute also performed the important task of training of elite sportspersons, for international 
competitions. This is also facilitated by the SAI H igh Altitude Training Centre (HATC), Shilaroo, 
Himachal Pradesh, being managed by this Institute. The Institute also contributes towards the 
training of upcoming and promising sportspersons, u nder the SAI Sports Promotion Schemes by 
managing the SAI Sports Training Centre, Patiala an d SAI Centre of Excellence, Patiala, as 
satellite training centres. The Institute also impl ements the SAI 'Pay & Play' and 'Come & Play' 
Schemes for training of youngsters, whereby beginners, mostly school children are provided sports 
training, by charging nominal fee. Being the premie r sports institute in the Country, the Institute 
holds key to the development of sports in India. It  has come a long way and is being popularly 

called the 'Mecca of Indian Sports' ; and sportsper sons from all over the Country yearn to visit it.  
The details of the facilities at NIS, Patiala are as follows:- 
Outdoor Facilities  
·Athletics Synthetic Track……......…2  
·Endurance Track – Synthetic…....... 1  
·Basketball Court.. ………….…....... 4  
·Cricket Ground………………..…... 1  
·Football Field..………………..…... 2  
·Handball Field.. ………………...… 2  
·Hockey Synthetic Field……….....…2  
·Hockey Grassy Field..………….......2  
·Swimming Pool - Standard…..........1  
·Tennis Courts - Synthetic....….....…3 - Cinder ...………...3  
·Velodrome……………………..….. 1  
·Volleyball Court………………..…..4  
·Sand Running Circuit…………...… 1  
·Cross Country Circuit…………...…1  
·Golf Course – 9 Holes………….......1 
Indoor Facilities  
·Badminton Court.…........4  
·Basketball Court……......3  
·Boxing Ring………..…...2  
·Billiards Room……….....1  
·Conditioning Hall……....3  
·Gymnasium………….…3  
·Handball Court………....1  
·Judo Hall…………….….2  
·Sauna……………….…..2  
·Steam……………….…..2  
·Squash Court………...….2  
·Table Tennis Hall…….....2  
·Volleyball Court……..….1  
·Wrestling Hall………..…1  
·Weightlifting Hall…..…..1 
 
 

SAI Netaji Subhas National Institute of Sports, Pat iala has the facilities for Athletics, Basketball, 
Boxing, Cricket, Cycling, Fencing, Football, Gymnas tics, Handball, Hockey, Judo, Table Tennis, 
Volleyball, Weightlifting, Wrestling and Wushu. 
 
42. The Committee was informed that, the Faculty of  Sports Sciences was set up in 1983, at 
the Institute and has the following departments, equipped with proper laboratories:  
1. Sports Physiology  
2. Sports Psychology  
3. Sports Biomechanics  
4. Sports Biochemistry  
5. Sports Anthropometry  
6. Sports Medicine  
7. General Theory & Methods of Training  
The Faculty is recognized as a scientific research institution by the department of Sciences and 
Technology; and is authorized by the MCI for conduc ting P.G. Diploma in Sports Medicine.  The 
main functions of the Faculty are :-  
/head2right Teaching the students of the Sports Coach education  programmes and teaching & 
management of the two year Postgraduate Diploma in Sports Medicine. 
/head2right  Provision of scientific support to the National Co aching Camps and Centres of the 
Sports promotion schemes of SAI. 
/head2right  Management of Research Fellowship Scheme of SAI 
/head2right  Promotion of Scientific research in Sports & Sports Sciences 
/head2right  Publication of a quarterly research Journal : The Journal of Sports & Sports 
Sciences. 
 
43. The Major Functions of Academics Teaching inclu des:-  
/head2right Organization of sports education programmes for tra ining of sports professionals 
e.g. coaches, doctors, scientists, for various sports related functions.  
/head2right Organization of refresher courses, seminars, confer ences & workshops, etc. for 
updating and up-grading the knowledge of the scient ists, coaches, sports officials, 
and sportspersons 
/head2right  Coordination and organization of the IOC Solidarit y Courses for the benefit of 
sports coaches & scientists. 
/head2right A source of information and counseling through expe rts and publication of sports 
literature. 
/head2right  Conducting and promoting research in sports and sports sciences. 
/head2right Dissemination of sports information. 

/head2right Publication of research quarterly, the 'Sports Rese arch' Coaching Training of 
International Probables  
/head2right Provision of material, logistic and scientific supp ort for the organization of the 
national coaching camps, for training of elite spor tspersons, for international 
competitions, under National Coaching Scheme. 
/head2right  Management of the SAI Training Centre and SAI Cent re of Excellence, for 
training of sportspersons, under the sports promotion schemes of the SAI. 
/head2right Provision of scientific support to the elite sports persons attending the national 
coaching camps, and to the trainees of the SAI spor ts promotion schemes, by 
monitoring their physiological and psychological status, through scientific tests, and 
through counseling. 
 
44. The Regular Academic Programmes being provided at NIS, Patiala are:-  
Diploma Course 
Introduced way back in 1963, this one year coach ed ucation programmes is the basic 
qualification, for professional competence, in the field of Sports Coaching; in a specific sport. 
Graduates, in any discipline, having proficiency in  a particular sport, are admitted to this 
programme. The Diploma Course is conducted, in vari ous disciplines, at the three SAI Centres of 
Patiala, Bangalore, and Kolkata. It includes 9½ mon th academic session followed by two month 
internship programme. The admission to this Course is conducted almost simultaneously, at these 
three centers. The session starts in the month of July, every year.  
M.Sc. in Sports Coaching  
In order to provide opportunity for higher studies in sports coaching, and to develop 
research aptitude of the coaches, the Institute con ducts a two-year Master Degree programme in 
Sports Coaching, in selected sports disciplines, fo r Diploma holders in Sports Coaching. The 
M.Sc. Programme in coaching introduces the coach to  higher levels of experience, knowledge and 
implementation of sports science to field coaching and opens a pathway for his development. This 
education programme is affiliated to Punjabi University, Patiala; and is conducted at Patiala Centre 
only. The session starts in the month of July, every year. 
Certificate Course in Sports Coaching  
The Institute conducts six-week Certificate Course in Sports Coaching, for training of 
level-I coaches, who are supposed to work with the Community Coaching Centres, local clubs and 
schools, at the grass-root level, for motivating an d introducing the children to sports. This 
elementary education programme is meant for in-serv ice physical education teachers/class room 
teachers / departmental candidates, and others havi ng flair for games and sports, with minimum 

educational qualification of '10+2' and prescribed participation in games / sports concerned. The 
candidates between 20 to 40 years of age can join t his Course. This course is conducted at selected 
centers, throughout the Country, during the vacation period of May / June, each year. 
Training of Elite Sportspersons National Coaching Camps  
Another major responsibility of Institute is the tr aining of elite sportspersons as, National 
probables for International Competitions, through t he National Coaching Camps. It is managed by 
the Coaching Cell of the Institute. The Institute p rovides comfortable residential accommodation, 
sports infrastructure of international standard, hy gienic and nutritious boarding facilities and a 
sporting environment at the two SAI centers, NIS Pa tiala and the SAI High Altitude Training 
Centre, Shilaroo (H.P.), for training of internatio nal probables / national teams, by the National 
Coaches, as per the Long -Term Development Plan pre pared by the National Sports Federations 
concerned. The training programmes planned by the S AI TEAMS Division, in consultation with 
the respective national sports federations, is impl emented and monitored by the Institute. The 
Faculty of Sports Sciences of the Institute conduct s scientific tests and evaluation of physical or 
physiological status of the sportspersons, and the scientific support / counseling is being provided 
accordingly.  
 
45. ‘ Pay and Play’ and ‘Come and Play' Schemes. 
These Schemes have been started by the SAI at its v arious Centres, in order to ensure the 
optimum utilization of the available sports infrast ructure and to earn some revenue. Individual 
sportspersons and organization could use this infra structure, for training on their own and 
competition purposes, on nominal payment. There is no provision for coaching, under this 
Scheme. This Scheme was launched at all SAI Centres , in the Country, on 1 October, 2011. The 
Scheme aims at mass participation in sports; system atic coaching support; talent spotting; and 
utilization of the available sports infrastructure at SAI centres, across the Country. Under this 
Scheme, training facility is available at NIS in the sports disciplines of Athletics, Archery, Boxing, 
Basketball, Cycling, Fencing, Gymnastics, Hockey, H andball, Judo, Swimming, Lawn Tennis, 
Table Tennis and Wushu, for the 8 to 17 years boys and girls at first come first serve basis, at a 
nominal fee of Rs.45/- per month only. Complementar y membership is available to international 
sportspersons, state & national level medal winners  of the past three years, and children of BPL 
families and concession for girls and children of G overnment schools. Under the Scheme, players 
are provided systematic coaching; playing arena; no n-consumable equipment; and maximum 

consumable equipment. Age-specific competitions are  also organized, in January and June, every 
year, for spotting the talent, to be nurtured furth er through various SAI Schemes like Training of 
Promising Sportspersons and Sports Promotion Schemes of SAI.  
 
46. It was further added that the Institute is also  making a considerable contribution towards 
coaching, under the two prestigious sports promotion schemes of the Sports Authority of India viz. 
SAI Centre of Excellence, Patiala and Sports Traini ng Centre, Patiala. To build up proficiency of 
building sportspersons, for excellence of national/  international level, under these schemes, the 
promising sports of selected disciplines are provid ed free coaching; sports facilities; equipment; 
scientific support; sports kit; competition exposur e; and medical and insurance cover. These 
satellite centers, of the Institute, are operating as sort of regular coaching camps, for the best 
available talent in the Country, in order to provid e two or possibly three concurrent layers of 
highly skilled sportspersons. These schemes have be en successful in contributing considerably to 
the national teams, and to the Indian medal tally, at the international competitions.  
 
47. The SAI officials informed the Committee about the Centre of Excellence at NIS, Patiala. 
They further added that,  in order to build up proficiency of budding outstan ding sportspersons for 
excellence of the International level, the Sports A uthority of India has set up ‘Centres of 
Excellence’ at a number of places in the Country. O ne such Centre has been set-up, at the Institute 
in October 2000. This Center of Excellence operates  as a regular coaching camp for the best 
available talent in India. This scheme is designed to provide two or possibly three concurrent 
layers of highly skilled sportspersons, giving a wi der choice of talent and continuity, for selection 
to the National teams. Initially, at this centre, i t was planned to introduce training in six 
disciplines, but later on, keeping in view the resp onse of the sportspersons, it was decided to have 
training in four disciplines of Athletics, Cycling,  Judo and Hockey.  Highly qualified and 
experienced coaches exclusively for handling the tr aining of these outstanding 
 boys and girls were 
also appointed. 
 
48. The Committee was informed about the National S ports Museum established in 1972, at 
the Institute, which is now India's cultural pride.  The purpose of the Museum is to remind the 
posterity of the accomplishments of our sportsperso ns. The Museum displays the rare trophies, 
shields, cups, medals, pin & badges, photographs, c ertificates, stamps, coins and personal sports-

gear of world renowned sports-personalities. The Mu seum has also received a large number of 
collections from the leading foreign sportsmen. Efforts are being made for conserving the museum 
articles with the help of experts from the National Museum, New Delhi. 
 
49. The other major responsibility of the Institute  is the management of National Coaching 
Camps, for participation in the International compe titions, in various sports, especially the priority  
disciplines of Athletics, Boxing, Hockey (Women), Weightlifting & Wrestling. The first priority is 
the senior national camps, while the junior nationa l camps are also undertaken. The National 
Coaching Camps in various sports disciplines for in ternational competitions at home and overseas 
are held from time to time at different venues in t he Country under the auspices of the national 
federation concerned and directly under the supervi sion of the Sports Authority of India, New 
Delhi. The training facilities, closer to the Inter national standard, are provided at our two centers,  
NIS Patiala, and the High Altitude Training Center,  Shilaroo (H.P). Sportspersons attending these 
camps are provided comfortable stay in the hostels of the Institute with nutritious food besides 
training facilities.  The Ministry of Youth Affairs  & Sports fully meets the financial implications 
involved in running the camps, such as: 
i. Free Board & Lodging 
ii. Training Kit 
iii. Competition/Ceremonial Kit 
iv. Equipment support 
 
It was also submitted that the National Coaching Ca mps are supervised by the Indian and Foreign 
coaches as and when recommended by the Federation c oncerned and approved by the Sports 
Authority of India.  The National Coaching Camps ar e backed by scientific tests at regular 
intervals. These tests are carried out by experienc ed scientists, mainly from the Departments of 
Sports Medicine, Physiology, Sports Psychology, Spo rts Anthropometry, Bio-chemistry and 
Nutrition in the Faculty of Sports Sciences at the NIS, Patiala.  To know the progress of the 
National Camps, Monitoring Committee meetings are h eld periodically to assess the progress of 
sportspersons before their participation in major International Competitions. Representatives of the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, IOA, Federations, SAI and Government observers/experts and 
National Coaches attend such meetings. To organise the National Coaching Camps, the 
Federations concerned chalks out yearly calendar fo r training/competition in conjunction with 

SAI/Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports and IOA. The  yearly training plan is formulated by 
National Coaches and GTMT experts. This includes pe riodisation of training, competitions, 
performance and fitness targets, conduct of scienti fic tests/evaluations (Fitness: Medical, 
Biochemical, Anthropometrical Psychological and Phy siological).  For mega events, as the 
Olympics, Commonwealth Games and Asian Games, speci al Coaching Camps are held for elite 
sportspersons and the training closely monitored an d performance watched before the final 
selection of the Indian contingent. 
50. At the NIS, Patiala, Smt. Krishna Punia, shot p ut medal winner at many sports events, 
submitted before the Committee that an Indoor Athle tic Stadium was needed to practice all the 
year round irrespective of any impact of the outsid e weather.  Smt. Annu Rani, National Javelin 
throw player, also highlighted the shortage of fund s at NIS, Patiala for equipment like Javelins, 
which were very costly. She submitted that each Jav elin costs at least 2 to 3 lakh but due to the 
shortage of funds there were not enough Javelins fo r practice, which is very crucial for winning at 
International Level.  Miss. Chhavi Kohli, National Fencing Player, pointed out that due to shortage 
of funds players are not getting foreign exposure inspite of best of efforts made by the institute. 
 
51. The Committee recommends that SAI should provid e more funds to NIS, Patiala for 
the purchase of equipments so that there are no sho rt-comings in the efforts being put in by 
these athletes for the upcoming Olympics Games, 201 6.  The Committee also recommends 
that an Indoor Stadium for Athletics should be buil d for the year and practice for athletes.  
The Committee also directed NIS, Patiala to have in terface with (State Bank of Patiala) SBP 
and other PSUs in Punjab for sponsorship and adopti on of certain events and players who 
have been shortlisted for International event.  The  State Bank of Patiala (SBP) had promised 
to help the centre.  The Institutes may identify th e areas where these PSUs are able to 
provide financial assistance.  The Committee was al so apprised that to participate in certain 
international events, players needed coaching in fo reign centres.  However, due to shortage 
of funds this was not possible.  The Committee feel s that the medal winning prospects should 
be given coaching in foreign centres and shortage o f funds should not come in the  way.  The 
Committee was also apprised that in Fencing there are many medal winning prospects. 
 
 

52. The Committee during its visit interacted with the National Campers and National 
Coaches.  National Campers and Coaches in Athletics intimated the Committee that this Institute is 
most suitable place for the conduct of National cam ps, still certain facilities are required to be 
created for further enhancement of performance as:- 
 
• 
 
 
 
Request made by Smt. 
Krishna Punia, 200 M - 
6 Lanes Indoor 
Synthetic Athletics 
Track 
 
It was informed that this Institute has Two Synthet ic 
Athletics Tracks which are open to sky. Training 
schedule of the Athletes is scheduled in different sessions 
depending upon the load and recovery of the campers . 
However, during peak summers and winters the same 
regimen could not be followed in sessions. This aff ects 
the training scheduled and recovery thereof. Elite 
Athletes and the Coaches underlined the need to hav e an 
all whether Indoor Synthetic Athletic Track at this  
Institute, which will be conducive for use without any 
effects of the weather.  
•
 Hydrotherapy/ recovery 
room in the Sauna/ 
Steam Bath Complex. 
 
Presently there is no proper hydrotherapy facility 
available at the Institute. Accordingly, the demand  is the 
creation of a mini Indoor pool where temperature of  
water is controlled upto 8 degree Celsius, desirabl e for 
the recovery of Elite Athletes. It was intimated to  the 
Committee that suitable place is available adjoinin g the 
Sauna / Steam Bath Complex where such like Indoor 
facility can be created..  
•
 Provision of Sauna/ 
Steam Bath in the 
Strength Training Hall 
for Athletics. 
 
Due to rush of National Campers in various sports 
disciplines at this Institute, existing facilities of Sauna / 
Steam Bath are inadequate. The National Coaches and  
the National Campers stressed the need to have Saun a / 
Steam Bath etc in the vicinity of the playfields / training 
area for Athletics. This can be done by constructin g two 
additional rooms which will accommodate Sauna and 
Steam Bath units etc separately with in the newly 
constructed Strength Training Hall for Athletics.             
•
 Sports Scientific 
Equipment  
Scientific Backup is of prime importance to excel i n any 
sports discipline. To reach that level modern scien tific 
equipments are required for various tests in 
Biomechanics, Biochemistry, Sports Physiology,   
Psychology, Teaching and Training methods, 
Anthropometry and Biochemistry are conducted with 
equipments. Present set of equipments require to be  
upgraded and additional equipment to be procured.  

• Creation of Hypoxic 
Chamber. 
With a view to provide Altitude like training at th is 
centre it is necessary to have a hypoxic chamber wh ere 
elite Athletes can train with high altitude advanta ge 
while living in plains.  
•
 Renovation of Silver 
Jubilee Hostel and P.T. 
Usha Hostel for Girls. 
These hostels were constructed in the year 1987 and  
2009 respectively. No major repairs especially to t he 
silver jubilee hostel for Girls have been carried o ut since 
its construction. Similarly the P.T. Usha hostel fo r 
women also has not been taken up for mandatory annu al 
repairs since its construction. Both these hostels require 
repairs / renovation works etc.  
•
 Renovation and 
upgradation of Boys 
Hostel and Girls Hostel 
(Old). 
These two hostels are as old as the Palace building  and 
Diploma students in various sports disciplines are 
accommodated in these hostels. Present condition of  the 
hostel requires major repairs/ renovation and 
upgradation.   
 
 
53. The Committee directed the Chief Engineer (NZ-1) an d the Superintending Engineer, 
CPWD, who were also present, to prepare a proposal for renovation/repair of sports 
infrastructure at NSNIS, Patiala by taking inputs from the coaches concerned and to see that 
it is as per International standards and submit to the Department of Sports for approval . 
 
54.  The Committee held discussions with CPSUs in Chandi garh which included  Bharat 
Heavy Electrical Limited (BHEL), Food Corporation o f India (FCI), Indian Railway 
Catering & Tourism Corporation (IRCTC), Metals and Minerals Trading Corporation of 
India (MMTC), National Buildings Construction Corpo ration (NBCC), Steel Authority of 
India Limited (SAIL), National Seeds Corporation Li mited (NSCL) and National Hydro-
electric Power Corporation (NHPC) along with author ities of Department of Sports on 
Promotion of Sports and Recruitment of Sportspersons in PSUs 
 
55. The representatives of Food Corporation of Indi a (FCI) submitted that a Control Board was 
constituted to make sports related policy as a welf are activity in FCI and for its implementation in 
the year 1969 with Chairman and Managing Director a s its ex-officio Patron/President. The 
Control Board is presently known as Sports Promotion Board, FCI. Under the control/guidelines of 
Sports Promotion Board, Sports Committees are funct ioning at Zonal/Regional Sports Promotion 

Committee headed by Executive Director (Zone) & Gen eral Manager (Region) as their ex-officio 
Presidents respectively. 
  
56. The representatives of FCI provided that SPB en courages its sportspersons through 
participation in various prominent tournaments as w ell as All India Public Sector 
Tournaments/National Championships in almost all ma jor disciplines of sports. It was mentioned 
that FCI also encourages sportspersons by providing  financial assistance for their participation in 
accredited International events abroad. It was also  submitted that SPB has been encouraging 
young, talented and budding student sportspersons s ince 1986 through Stipend Scheme keeping 
with the objectives of National Sports Policy. It w as mentioned that about 150 promising 
sportspersons showing potential for outstanding per formances are granted annual stipend in the 
scheme every year. The monthly stipend is granted i n the age groups of 15-21 years and 21-24 
years. The sportspersons are given adequate exposur e at State/National level, as a part of FCI 
Teams. The representatives of FCI submitted that th e success of FCI SPB Stipend Scheme is 
evident from the outstanding performances of Smt. K . Malleshwari (Weightlifting), Shri Saurav 
Ganguly and Shri Ajay Ratra (Cricket), Shri Sharad Kamal and Shri Pritheviraj Bose (Table-
Tennis) who were on the stipend rolls of the Corpor ation. It was pointed out that the Food 
Corporation of India Sports Promotion Board organis es All India Inter Zonal Tournaments in 
Football, Cricket, Hockey, Badminton and Table Tennis every year. 
 
57. The representatives of Bharat Heavy Electricals  Limited (BHEL) submitted that the 
Company have been supporting the cause of promotion  and participation in sports at various 
levels. The Company has been providing requisite fa cilitation by way of sponsorships to sport 
events (at National, State and District levels) and  has also established in-house facilities for use b y 
its employees and public at large on need basis. It  was also submitted that the Company is one of 
the founding members of All India Public Sector spo rts Promotion Board (AIPSSPB) since the 
year 2009.  
 
58. It was further mentioned that the Company has b een supporting sports by 
creation/maintaining of infrastructure facilities a t its different Units besides sponsoring its 
employees to various sporting events. All the major  Units of BHEL are having sports 
facilities/stadium(s) with requisite support staff,  infrastructural support etc. for organising sports  

events. It was mentioned that in this regard, the s ports complex of BHEL at Bhopal has facilities 
for catering to 18 different sports and is also associated with the Sports Authority of India (SAI). It 
was pointed out that this facility has even hosted major sporting events such as Ranji Tournaments 
in the past and the entire cost of running of the s port complexes of BHEL is borne by the 
Company. The Company is having around 105 facility centres at different Units in respect of 
Volleyball, Basketball, Table Tennis, Cricket, Badm inton, Chess, Carrom, Taekwondo, Wrestling, 
Judo, Baseball, Snooker, Lawn Tennis, Shooting Ball, Swimming, Weight lifting, etc. 
 
59. It was also informed that the Company incurred an expenditure of over Rs. 8 Crore during 
the last 5 years towards sports promotion under the  ambit of various initiatives, viz. Corporate 
Social Responsibility (CSR), other welfare measures , sponsorships and creation/maintenance of 
sporting infrastructure. Need based funds are provi ded by BHEL for promotion of sports under its 
“Healthy India” focus area of CSR Policy. The Compa ny has been promoting various sports, viz. 
Hockey, Volleyball, Tennis, Kho-Kho, Basketball, Ch ess, etc. through funding support under the 
domain CSR. It was mentioned that an amount of near ly Rs. 97 lakh during the last five years has 
been provided under CSR including sports infrastruc ture development (e.g. wooden playing 
surface at Trichy Anna Stadium and part constructio n of Kambala stadium in Udupi District, 
Karnataka) and organising of sports events by diffe rent agencies. It was further submitted that as 
the contribution by BHEL towards promotion of sport s are felt to be adequate, hence a separate 
contribution to NSDF was not undertaken by the Company. 
 
60. The Committee was informed that the Company was  having 46 sportspersons on its rolls 
who represented/represent BHEL at National/State Le vel in their respective sports. It was also 
pointed out that in BHEL, in recruitment to Group ‘ C’ posts, all other criteria being equal, 
preference for sportspersons is provided though the re are no specific guidelines for recruitment of 
sportspersons. In this regard, the guidelines of erstwhile Bureau of Public Enterprises (BPE) issued 
vide BPE OM No. 15/27/84-BPE(GM) dated 05.12.1984 r egarding “Appointment of Meritorious 
Sportsmen to Group C and D posts” in CPSEs was canc elled vide Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE) OM No. 20(5)/95-DPE(GM) dated 10. 12.1997 and there are no currently 
applicable DPE guidelines on the matter. 
 
 

61. The representatives of National Hydroelectric P ower Corporation (NHPC) submitted that 
for promoting sports and cultural activities, NHPC has been contributing to Power Sports Control 
Board (PSCB) since its inception in 1994. The last contribution made to this fund by NHPC was 
Rs. 20 lakh for the year 2013-14 and 2014-15. PSCB was set up under the aegis of Ministry of 
Power, Government of India for promotion of sports among Power Sector PSUs/organisations. 
The expenditure incurred by PSCB in Financial Year 2013-14 and 2014-15 are for Rs. 11,54,185/- 
and Rs. 12, 45, 077/-. 
 
62. NHPC submitted that no fixed percentage of the CSR fund has been earmarked for 
promotion of sports. However, a minimum of Rs. 60 L akh is spent annually for promotion of 
sports. It was also pointed out that no contributio n towards NSDF has been made. Under CSR 
activities, promotion of sports are being done by o rganising Sports tournaments, providing 
infrastructure, supports to youth clubs, sports kit s and equipments to rural clubs and associations. 
During the financial year 2014-15, it was mentioned  that an expenditure of Rs. 49 lakh was 
incurred for promotion of Sports under CSR and Sust ainable Development Policy. NHPC also 
sponsors sports meets and other sporting activities  at Projects/Power Stations as well as Corporate 
level towards fulfilment of Corporate Social obliga tion of helping the cause of sports in the 
Country. NHPC has sponsored All India Governor’s Go ld Cup Football Tournament, 2013 
(Gangtok, Sikkim), All India Sub Junior ranking Bad minton Tournament, 2013 (Guwahati, 
Assam), 9 
th  Mission Dosti International Wrestling Competition,  2013 (Katra, Jammu and 
Kashmir), Chief Ministers Gold Cup Football Tournam ent, 2013 and 2014 (Sikkim), Haryana 
State Level Table Tennis 2014, North East India Cup  Football Competition, 2014 (North 
Lakhimpur, Assam), Faridabad District Swimming Cham pionship, 2015. NHPC has participated 
in various other Inter-CPSU tournaments organised b y various Power PSUs on behalf of PSCB. 
Total expenditure for organising tournaments on beh alf of PSCB and also on participation of 
NHPC teams in various tournaments organised by othe r PSUs is borne by NHPC. It was also 
pointed out that NHPC’s HR Policy has a provision f or Special Casual Leave upto 30 days in a 
calendar year for participation of employees in National/International Sports/games. 
 
63. It was mentioned that NHPC has been sponsoring individual players selected for 
international sports events. For instance, during 2 013-14, Ms. A. Nalini, Assistant Manager 
(Finance) was sponsored for participation in 6 
th  World Dwarf Olympic Games, 2013 held from 3 rd  

to 10 th  August, 2013 at Michigan, USA. She was given cash award of Rs. 50,000/- by NHPC for 
winning four medals including three gold medals. Si nce promotion of sports is a part of NHPC’s 
Corporate Social Responsibility and Sustainable Dev elopment Policy, NHPC shall consider 
adopting any individual sport/centre/ground etc. as and when any such request is received.   
 
64. Regarding sports policy, NHPC submitted that fo rmulation of sports policy is under way in 
terms of Minutes of the Meeting taken by Secretary (Power), Ministry of Power on 02.01.2014. 
NHPC has a Scheme for Unlocking Creativity and Inno vation at Work Place in which there is 
provision for cash award amounting to Rs. 50,000/- for excellence in sports at National level. As 
regards to following of instructions/guidelines of the Ministry, NHPC mentioned that the 
directives of Central Government received through D epartment of Public Enterprise (DPE) from 
time to time are followed. However, there is no spe cific instruction/guideline of the Ministry/DPE 
for recruitment of sportspersons. Regarding recruit ment of sportspersons, it was submitted that 
NHPC inherited huge manpower along with three Centr al Government Projects namely Salal, 
Bairasiul and Loktak after its formation. Consequen tly, as on date, surplus manpower in group ‘C’ 
and ‘D’ is about 1160. Hence, no recruitment has be en made in these categories except on account 
of Compassionate Appointment/Project Affected Famil ies/Compulsory Absorption from 
Brahmaputra Board. However, recruitment of sportspe rsons shall be considered as per extant 
guidelines of Ministry/DPE whenever any recruitment in Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts will take place. 
 
65. The representatives of Metals and Minerals Trad ing Corporation of India (MMTC) Limited 
submitted that a “Recreation Club” was established at the Corporate Office and the Regional 
Offices through which the employees participate in sports. Employees have also formed teams and 
the MMTC teams participate majorly in indoor sports  like table tennis, chess, caroms, etc. It was 
pointed out that MMT had full fledged teams in cric ket, hockey and football. The Hockey team 
took part in prestigious tournaments like the Nehru  Cup, Scindia Gold Cup etc. The cricket team 
took part in the Delhi District Cricket Association  and other local league tournaments. Inter 
regional tournaments were held every year in which sports like cricket, hockey, football, carom, 
table tennis and athletics were covered. This annual tournaments started sometime in late 70’s. The 
last inter regional tournament was held in 1985. Ag e related inability of the existing sportspersons 
and lack of fresh recruitment of sportspersons led to the discontinuation of MMTC participation in 
sports activities. 

 
66. It was mentioned that MMTC’s CSR Policy has the  “Promotion of Arts, Sports and Indian 
Culture” as one of the focus areas. Inspite of mode st budgets, it was pointed out that MMTC has 
done its utmost for promotion of sports. In the pas t, MMTC supported the Shahabad Hockey 
Centre, Haryana. This Sports Centre has been the tr aining ground for hockey players especially 
girls who have represented India in International T ournaments like World Cup, Common Wealth 
Games, Asiad Games and Afro-Asian Games etc. MMTC p rovided them with equipments (hockey 
sticks, balls, pads, gloves, helmet etc.) to be uti lized for the purpose of supporting the training of  
these young talented girls. Some of these girls wer e part of the Indian Women’s Hockey team 
which went on to win the Bronze Medal in the Junior  Women’s Hockey World Cup. MMTC also 
felicitated the medal winners of the XIX Commonweal th Games, 2010 so as to encourage new 
talent to excel in their respective field of sport.  Besides, MMTC has been associated with the 
Suryaprava-Mega Cycling Marathon in Bhubaneswar and  the Nagpur Marathon for promotion of 
sports. 
 
67. It was further pointed out that till the early 1990’s several sportspersons who have played 
at National/State/University level were recruited i n the Staff. Recruitment in the Staff category, 
including that of sportspersons has been put on hol d since 1992 on account of the high number of 
Staff. At present, there is recruitment only at the  entry level of Group A posts, as Deputy 
Managers. It was submitted that MMTC has been recru iting almost 15-20 officers every year on 
average at the entry level for the past several yea rs, not even one application has been received 
from any sportsperson till date for consideration for appointment. However, MMTC complies with 
the guidelines of DoPT/DPE and GoI in providing res ervation in recruitment to SC/ST/OBC and 
PwD candidates. It was mentioned that there is no p rovision for reservation of any posts for 
sportspersons in terms of the Company’s recruitment rules. 
 
68. The representatives of National Buildings Const ruction Corporation Limited (NBCC) 
submitted that during financial year 2012-13, NBCC has sponsored the Future Kids Scheme of 
Bengal Tennis Association, Kolkata and has extended  financial help of Rs. 5 Lakh to Bengal 
Tennis Association. However, it was pointed out tha t no percentage on the funds has been 
earmarked for CSR to be spent on promotion of sport s. Further, NBCC has not sponsored any 
individual player nor adopted any SAI centre/events , etc. from CSR funds and no such proposal is 

available with NBCC. However, it was mentioned that  NBCC has not contributed to NSDF from 
CSR Funds for want of specific proposal. 
 
69. Regarding sports policy, it was mentioned that there is no such policy in NBCC currently. 
However, from time to time, NBCC sponsored players in Badminton Tournaments. This year 
NBCC has sponsored players in recently held PNB Met life Open Badminton Tournament in JLN 
Stadium. Under CSR Scheme, NBCC undertakes certain sports activities for under-privileged 
children. 
 
70. As regards to following of guidelines of the Mi nistry, it was submitted that, NBCC does 
not have any guidelines from the Government or Mini stry. Also there is no Sports Promotion 
Board in NBCC. Regarding promotion of sports in tri bal areas and North-Eastern region, NBCC 
mentioned that there is no policy as such. 
 
71. The representatives of National Seeds Corporati on (NSC) Limited submitted that NSC has 
no definite sports policy for promotion of sports i n India, since it is totally agriculture based 
corporation. It was also pointed out that NSC is un able to contribute to NSDF. Due to paucity of 
funds, no steps to promote sports under CSR were taken up and NSC has not fixed a percentage on 
the funds earmarked for CSR to be spent on promotio n of sports. Regarding following of various 
instructions/guidelines of the Ministry for recruit ment of sportspersons, NSC submitted that DoPT 
Instructions/guidelines are being followed after is suance by Department of Public Enterprises on 
the same. No sportsperson has been recruited under sports quota in NSC nor NSC is not 
sponsoring individual players selected for international events or adopted any SAI centre/event etc. 
NSC does not have any Sports Promotion Board and is  not a member of All India Sports 
Promotion Board.  
 
72. The representatives of Steel Authority of India  Limited (SAIL) submitted that promotion of 
sports has been an integral part of the corporate p hilosophy of SAIL right from its inception. 
Continuous emphasis on sports activities has helped  SAIL develop players who have gone on to 
compete at State and National levels of various com petitions. SAIL has constituted teams from 
among its employees and their wards for taking part  in various national-level sporting events. The 
company has regular teams in football, hockey and c ricket. Under CSR, SAIL has been promoting 
rural sports in the peripheral areas of steel towns hips, which includes organising inter-village 

tournaments in football, volleyball, kabaddi etc. I t was mentioned that such games have been well 
received at the village level with active participation of the villagers. 
SAIL has established several residential Sports Academies like:- 
• Football Academy at Bokaro (Boys) 
• Football Academy at Burnpur (Senior Boys) 
• Hockey Academy at Rourkela (Boys) 
• Athletics Academy at Bhilai (Boys) 
• Athletics Academy at Durgapur (Girls) 
• Archery Academy at Kiriburu (Boys & Girls) 
 
73. It was mentioned that the Steel townships have an impressive sports infrastructure. There 
are sports complexes with provision of facilities for the grounds, indoor and outdoor courts, tracks, 
pools, gymnasia and stadia conforming to national a nd international standards in some of them. 
The sports academies cover the peripheral areas of the steel plants as well as different regions of 
the Country and select suitable young talents for e nrolment. The trainees are put through strict 
training by well-qualified coaches in each of the f ields and groomed to higher levels of 
competence. It was submitted that a Committee at th e Corporate Level of the Company monitors 
all the sports academy activities of SAIL, includin g policy formations and their implementation, 
budget, co-ordination with the steel plants and out side agencies, etc. The Committee’s work is 
aided by a sports cell in each plant/unit, headed b y a sports officer, which conducts year-long 
sports activities in different disciplines at the unit level. 
 
74. It was further pointed out that recruitments ar e carried out in terms of the Annual Human 
Resource Plan for meeting the requirement of skille d manpower for new facilities and recoupment 
of skill gaps for maintaining smooth operations. Th e said recruitments are carried out complying 
to, inter-alia, the Recruitment Policy and Recruitm ent manual of Company approved by Board. 
However, SAIL does not have any policy for recruitm ent of sports under sports quota. It was 
mentioned that major plants/units of SAIL have a se parate Sports Cell/Sports Department which 
undertakes/organises sporting activities in plants/ units. A total of 105 employees are deployed 
specifically in Sports Cell/Sports Department of va rious plants/units. Some of the present/past 
Arjuna/Dronacharya awardees within SAIL are Rajendr a Prasad in Boxing, Bishan Singh Bedi in 
Cricket, Hanuman Singh in Basketball, Peter Thangra j in Football, Michael Kindo in Hockey and 

Minati Mahapatra in Cycling. It was brought to the attention of the Committee that SAIL sponsors 
eminent wrestlers Shri Yogeshwar Dutt and Shri Sushil Kumar. 
 
75. The Committee held discussions with Punjab Nati onal Bank (PNB), Oriental Bank of 
Commerce(OBC), Punjab and Sindh Bank(P&SB), and Ind ustrial Finance Corporation of 
India (IFCI) at Chandigarh on the performance of Na tional Sports development Fund and 
Promotion of Sports and recruitment of Sportspersons in Banks. 
 
76. The representatives of Punjab National Bank sub mitted that Punjab National Bank has 
established PNB Hockey Academy in September, 2002 t o promote National Sport of Hockey.  
PNB Hockey Academy has two teams - Junior Team of 2 5 players, in the age group of 14-18 and 
Senior Team of 25 players, above 18 years of age.  Following facilities/amenities are provided:- 
Junior Team : Bank is providing boarding and lodging, training th rough professional coach, 
playing kits, consultancy services of dietician, do ctor, transportation, insurance facilities and 
monthly stipend to junior players. 
Senior Team  : Senior team players are permanent employees of t he Bank.  Recruited in clerical 
cadre, players have opportunity to take further pro motions.  We have been motivating players to 
take promotions as a result of which, 5 players hav e since been promoted to officer cadre.  Senior 
players are provided specialized training facility through professional coaches outsourced from 
SAI.  Besides they get daily diet allowance, playin g kits, consultancy services of dietician, doctor, 
physiotherapist, travelling allowance (on tour), insurance coverage etc. 
 
77. The Bank allocates annual budget exclusively fo r the PNB Hockey Academy.  During the 
current year the Bank has allocated budget of Rs. 2015 crores for Senior hockey team and RS. 1.13 
crore for the Junior hockey team.  The Bank has Boa rd approved policy for recruitment of 
sportspersons since 2002.  In terms of the said pol icy, Bank has so far recruited 30 sportspersons 
as Hockey Players (Male) in clerical cadre.  Out of  30, 20 are still playing for Sr. Hockey Team of 
the Bank.  Out of these 20 players, 05 have since b een promoted to Officer Cadre and present 
strength of sportspersons in clerical cadre is 15.  Process for recruitment of 09 more Hockey 
Players is in progress. However, the Bank is not making any contribution to NSDF. 
 

78. Regarding steps taken up by the Bank in promoti ng sports in tribal areas and North Eastern 
Region, it is submitted that no region specific pol icy/preference is framed, however there are 
players from tribal area in its team.  It was furth er maintained that Bank releases notification 
through national daily besides uploading the same o n the Bank's website.  For wider circulation, 
window advertisement is also released in local dail ies published from states like North East, 
Odisha and Madhya Pradesh etc. so as to include rep resentation of North East Region and tribal 
regions.  The representatives of Punjab and Sind Ba nk submitted that a Sports Cell was set up at 
Head Office under Public Relations Department in th e year 1985 to provide the needed impetus to 
the sports activities such as Badminton, Carom, Tab le-Tennis, Hockey etc. The Bank established 
its own hockey team on 01.04.1985 with a view to up lift the sagging standards of hockey in the 
Country. To further strengthen the hockey at the Na tional level, a Junior Hockey Academy was set 
up by the Bank in the year 1994. The Bank also set up Sub-Junior Hockey Academy in the year 
2002 for picking up young talent. The Bank has dire ct affiliation with Indian Hockey Federation 
since the year 1995.  
 
79. Regarding recruitment of sportspersons in the B ank, it was submitted that the Bank makes 
recruitment of Hockey players in clerical cadre, as per approved recruitment policy of the Bank for 
clerical cadre. Further, guidelines formulated by B ank’s Sports Board (IBA) had been adopted by 
the Bank vide Board resolution No. 12384 dated 30.0 1.1999. Players who perform well 
continuously are given out of turn promotion to off icer cadre (JMGS-I) and so on, as per 
Government guidelines. It was further mentioned tha t Ministry of Finance vide letter No. 
F/N0/4/11/1/2006-IR dated 29.06.2009 has directed t he Bank to seek the approval of the Board 
while recruiting players for Bank’s Hockey Team. Th e Bank has recruited 6 Hockey players in 
clerical cadre in 2012-13. The Bank is in the process of recruitment of 8 Hockey players in clerical 
cadre in the Bank during the current year and appro val for the same has already been obtained 
from the Board, vide Board Resolution No. 21839 dat ed 08.08.2015. Presently, the Bank’s Sports 
Board does not exist and in the absence of an appro ved sports policy, the Bank is following the 
revised guidelines of Bank’s Sports Board, already adopted vide above said board resolution. 
 
80. It was mentioned that all the matters relating to hockey team/junior hockey academy are 
being handled/watched by the Sports Cell at Jalandh ar and Zonal Manager, Jaladhar is the 
Chairman of the Sports Cell. The supervision, contr ol and coordination with respect to 

recruitment/induction of players, constitution of S election Committee, Promotion Policy and 
Promotion cases in addition to calendar of tourname nts, review of progress, TA/DA, refreshment, 
conveyance etc. of Hockey players are entrusted to a Steering Committee which is functional 
under Sports Cell, Jalandhar. The Sports Cell obtai ns funds for the development of sports for the 
same from head office, Planning and Development Dep artment. During the current year, the Bank 
has earmarked Rs. 19,42,000/- for development of sp orts, particularly Hockey. The Bank is also 
paying travelling and halting expenses equivalent t o that for Officers of JMGS-I of the Bank. 
However, it was submitted that data with respect to  NSDF pertaining to the year till 2004-05 and 
later are not available due to fire incident at Hea d Office. Presently, the Bank is not contributing 
any funds towards NSDF. 
 
81. The representatives of State Bank of Patiala su bmitted that at present 21 sportsperson are 
recruited by the Bank for their excellence in field of sports is on Bank's payroll.  They are also sent 
for participating in various Tournaments.  It was m entioned that the Bank is a regular member of 
AIPSSB since 2011. In the year 2014-15 the Bank had  allocated a sum of Rs. 19.00 lacs. For the 
year 2015-16, Bank has also allocated a sum of Rs. 19.20 lacs for promotion of sports activities in 
our Bank.  Besides the above, Bank also spends on t raining of all the sportsmen throughout the 
year. Out of 21, 20 employees joined the Bank in Cl erical cadre and 1 in Officer Cadre.  Four 
employees who joined in clerical cadre have been pr omoted to officer cadre.  Shri Navjot Singh 
Siddhu, international player was an officer of the Bank recruited on sports quota. 
It was pointed out the Bank has been contributing t o sports sponsorship regularly on a case to case 
basis.  During the last financial year 2014-15, these cases were as under:- 
/square4 A sum of Rs. 1,00,000/- was donated to organizers f or holding of an International 
Tournament for Deaf and dumb held at Chandigarh in August, 2014. 
/square4 Miss Mandeep Kaur a Gold Medalist Athletic of 2014 Asian Games held at Incheon, South 
Korea was awarded a cash prize of Rs. 21000/- 
/square4 Sponsorship of Rs. 1.00 lacs was awarded to Ms. Jas min to enable her to participate in the 
Senior Commonwealth Fencing Championship held at Largs (Scotland). 
/square4 A sum of Rs. 20000/- was donated to National Betera n T.T. Championship held at Kochi 
(Kerala) in February, 2015. 
 
82. The Bank has also been encouraging the staff me mbers to actively participate in sporting 
activities by regularly holding matches.  The Bank organized a cycle rally on 13 
th  October, 2015 at 

Patiala.  The Bank regularly felicitates through ci tations and cash rewards notable achievements in 
the sports field in our area of operation. It was m entioned that the Bank has regular teams in 
Cricket and Table Tennis which regularly participat e in Public Sector undertaking tournaments.  
Bank provides time off facilities to all sportspers on for their daily practice and special sports leav e 
when they participate in different tournaments at N ational or State level as players as well as 
Referees/Coaches. 
 
83. Regarding framing of sports policy for promotio n of Sports in the Country, the Bank 
submitted that a compendium of Instructions relatin g to Recruitment, Promotion and other 
guidelines in respect of Sportspersons in the Bank has been issued after approval from Bank's 
Board.  Special Sports leave are provided to partic ipate as officials in the National Tournaments or 
State Level Tournaments. It was further submitted that as the Bank have no branches in North-East 
Region, they are unable to contribute specifically to sports in North-East Region.   
 
 
84. The representatives of Industrial Finance Corpo ration of India (IFCI) submitted that 
Government of India had recently acquired Majority stakes in the Company only recently and it 
has slowly started implementing all Government Guid elines regarding promotion of Sports and 
recruitment of Sportspersons. It was also submitted  that the Company is already contributing the 
mandated 2% of its profit under the CSR. It was fur ther assured that 15% of its contribution under 
CSR would be exclusively earmarked for Sports only.    
 
85. The representatives of the Oriental Bank of Com merce (OBC) submitted that their Bank 
has been focusing in two Games i.e., Football and Hockey. The Bank has been sponsoring a  
number of Tournaments in these two disciplines. It has also supported two Mountaineers recently 
and assured the Committee that more will be done in  the future. He further submitted that the 
Company is focusing on our National Games i.e., Hockey as well as Football in the North-East 
India, which has produced very good players in the past. A member pointed out that the 
recruitment process in the Bank has been stopped si nce 1996 and in view thereof, how the Bank is 
achieving its responsibilities in promotion of Spor ts and recruitment of Sportspersons. The 
representative of the Bank agreed to this fact and stated that after the Banks’ Sports Board became 
defunct 5years back, the focus on sports was someho w lacking and at present there is no Sports 

Policy of the Bank. However, he informed that recru itment has started since 2010 and assured that 
focus will be brought to Sports again.   
 
86. The Committee appreciates the efforts undertake n by the PSUs and PSBs to promote 
sports. Some of the PSUs like SAIL, BHEL etc. and B anks have invested a lot in the 
development of sports in the Country. However, the Committee observes that most of the 
PSUs and PSBs have no definite sports policy for pr omotion of sports in the Country and 
recruitment of sportspersons. It was brought to the  notice of the Committee that most of the 
PSUs are following the directives of Central Government which are issued from time to time. 
The Committee is unhappy to note that most of the P SUs are not aware of National Sports 
Development (NSDF). Also no funds from CSR are allo cated for promotion of sports. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that Sports Aut hority of India (SAI) should 
undertake efforts to make all PSUs and Banks aware of this fund so that more contribution 
can be put forward for the promotion and developmen t of sports in the Country. The 
Committee also observes that SAI needs to tie up wi th the concerned agencies so that a 
definite sports policy can be adopted by the PSUs a nd Banks for promotion of sports in the 
perspective of the National Sports Policy, 2001, wh ich envisage promotion of excellence in 
Sports and also broad-basing of Sports. Further, a policy needs to be formulated so that 
certain percentage of the funds earmarked for CSR a ctivities can be allotted for the 
promotion and development of sports in the Country.  The recruitment of Sportspersons in 
PSUs/PSBs are being done as per the Guidelines of D oPT, which stipulates reservation upto 
5% in existing vacancies. This implies that there i s no minimum Cap for employment of 
Sportsperson in the said Guidelines. The Committee,  therefore, strongly recommends that 
DoPT should make necessary amendments in the Guidel ines for recruitments of 
Sportspersons so that the mandatory 5% quota of Spo rtspersons of arising vacancies is filled 
up. 
 
87. The Committee held discussion with the State Go vernments of Punjab and Haryana 
and the Administration of Union Territory of Chandi garh along with authorities of 
Department of Sports on Promotion of Sports and Recruitment of Sportspersons in PSBs. 
 

88. The Department of Sports, Chandigarh Administra tion, gave a detailed submission to the 
Committee about the existing as well as upcoming Sp orts infrastructure in the U.T. There is a total 
of 10 existing sports Stadia/ Centres in the U.T., covering various Sports disciplines and Fitness 
Centres. There are also 4 existing Sports Academies (Football, Hockey, Cricket and Girls-Hockey) 
having a total of 157 trainees under its administra tion. Apart from this, there are three up-coming 
projects, which will cater to various disciplines o f Sports as well as Health Club also. It was also 
informed that a number of scholarships/ cash incent ives are provided to deserving sports-persons 
as well as medal-winners at various National and International level competitions. 
 
89. The Sports Authority of India also gave a detai led submission to the Committee on the SAI 
Regional Centre at Chandigarh. The SRC was shifted from Bahalgarh (Sonepat) to Chandigarh in 
March, 2009 and became functional from 1 
st  April, 2009 at Hockey Stadium, Sector-42, 
Chandigarh. The Centre presently does not have its own Campus and is functioning from here for 
office purpose only. The Govt. of Punjab has provid ed 73 Bhigas 06 Biswa of land near Zirakpur, 
adjacent to Chandigarh airport for establishment of  a full-fledged Regional Centre and 
construction work has been entrusted to CPWD and the work is in progress. 
 
90. The SRC, Chandigarh implements and monitors SAI  sports promotional schemes in the 
States of Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir  and U.T. of Chandigarh.  There are six 
SAI Training Centres (STCs) and seven Extension Cen tres under SRC, Chandigarh catering to a 
total strength of 548 Boys and 293 Girls. The Regio nal Centre has produced a number of Medal 
winners both at National as well as International Level. 
 
91. The representatives of State Government of Hary ana submitted that Medal Winners in 
sports, as per well defined criteria, were provided  jobs in the departments of Home, Sports and 
Youth Affairs, School Education and Development and  Panchayats, which have vital role in 
promotion of sports in the State.  The officials ad ded that the services of the Sports medal winners 
who will be provided jobs will be utilized principa lly for promotions of Sports.  The appointment 
to sports medal winners will be on Group 'A' or Gro up 'B' or Group 'C' posts in accordance as per 
the following criteria:- 
/xrhombus Gold Medal winners of Olympic Games will be conside red for appointment to any Group 
'A'  post in these Departments. 

/xrhombus Silver and Bronze Medal winners of Olympic Games an d Gold Medal winners of Asian 
Games and Commonwealth Games will be considered for  appointment to any Group 'B' 
post in these Departments. 
/xrhombus Participants of Olympic Games, Silver and Bronze Me dal winners of Asian 
Games/Commonwealth Games or Medal winners of world Championship/World Cup, 
Asian or Commonwealth Championship organized by rec ognized Sport Associations, on 
the basis of level and importance of competition/to urnament, will be considered for 
appointment to any Group 'C' post in these departme nts.  The above 
Games/Championship/Cup should be recognized by the concerned International 
Association/Body/Federation for the games. 
 
The Committee was also informed that medal winners,  who are appointed under this category in 
different Departments will be encouraged and provid ed enabling environment to continue playing 
and achieving high goals in their respective sports  for at least 5 years and during this period their 
performance assessment will be linked to their spor ting achievements.  These players will also be 
made available to the Sports and Youth Affairs depa rtment for participation, training or 
supervision of tournaments as required.  The eligib le medal winners will be appointed on different 
category posts which are vacant or by deemed creati on of new posts in the required category by 
the concerned department.  These new posts will be in addition to the regular cadre strength.  The 
eligible medal winners who join a department on a p articular category of post will be exempt from 
the requisite professional qualifications and will be required to complete special 
courses/professional courses prescribed by the department in a given frame. 
 
92. The Officials of State Government of Haryana fu rther gave information about the efforts 
given by the State Government to establish world class Sports Academies in the State as follows: 
 
• Land is provided by the Government to the eligible sportspersons who want to open a 
Sports Academy in the discipline in which he/she has achieved the Olympic medal. 
• Land is be provided upto 10 acres, on need basis, on lease at concessional rates. 
• The eligible sportspersons will be medal winners at the Olympic Games. 
• The eligible sportspersons will be those who have r epresented the State of Haryana or the 
sportsperson or at least one of the parents of the sportsperson is born in Haryana State. 
 
93. It was further submitted that it is the endeavo ur of the State Government to promote all 
sports disciplines which are regularly featuring in  Olympics, Asian Games and Commonwealth 

Games and the State Sports Department maintains a l ist of games to be supported by it. There is 
also a Standing Committee which recommends games to be included or deleted from the list.  
OLYMPIC GAMES 
1.  Archery  15.  Judo  
2.  Athletics  16.  Triathlon  
3.  Badminton  17.  Rowing  
4.  Basket Ball  18.  Swimming  
5.  Boxing  19.  Sailing(Yachting)  
6.  Canoeing  20.  Shooting  
7.  Cycling  21.  Table Tennis  
8.  Equestrian  22.  Tae-Kwan-do  
9.  Fencing  23.  Tennis  
10.  Football  24.  Volley Ball  
11.  Golf  25.  Weight Lifting  
12.  Gymnastics  26.  Wrestling  
13. Handball   
14. Hockey   
  
 Apart from these games appropriate measures will b e taken to promote rural games and games 
which are likely to be included in future Olympics/ Asian Games. Marathon race would also be 
promoted.  
 
94. The officials further informed about Classifica tion of Games based on potential to excel in 
various games at International and National level; the games would be grouped in categories so as 
to deploy resources with a view to achieve best outcome as follows:- 
 
(A) Priority Games/High Potential Games  
In this category such sports can be listed in which  the current standards are at or close to 
International competitive levels and where the team s or individuals are likely to win 
medals in future. It also includes High potential g ames where the athletes from Haryana 
have performed exceedingly well in the National and  International competitions. The 
strategy in these games would be to maintain and up grade achievements by making use of 
sports management techniques, use of Science and Te chnology and other advance 
techniques. The suggestive list of games in this ca tegory may be athletics, wrestling, 
weightlifting, volleyball, basketball, women hockey, boxing, judo and yoga.  
 

 
(B) General Category/Medium Potential Games  
Sports, which are included in Olympic, Commonwealth and Asian Games, and where there 
is a proven aptitude but not yet close to internati onal competitive levels are listed in this 
categories; and medium potential games where the at hletes from Haryana has potential to 
win medals in national and international competitio ns. The strategy in these games would 
be to improve game specific skills and techniques o f the players and to upgrade 
infrastructure and coaching facilities. The efforts  would be directed towards ensuring a 
substantially better performance at national level.  The suggestive list of games in this 
category may be football, aquatic, badminton, lawn tennis, handball and hockey (men). 
 
95. The officials also informed about the Sports fa cilities in educational institutions.  This 
policy reiterates the critical importance of sports  and games in educational institutions to the 
achievement of the policy’s objectives and seeks to:  
• get physical education and sports made an integral part of the curriculum up to the higher 
secondary level. 
•  make available adequate number of trained physical  education and sports teachers through 
a time-bound programme and arrangements made for playfields. 
• engage physical instructors in schools and make ava ilable at least 1 acre of land for a 
primary school and 2.5 acres of land for an upper p rimary school for use as playgrounds. 
Guidelines may be put in place for the recruitment of physical education instructors, and 
provision of developed playfield and sports equipme nt, for recognition of schools and 
colleges; 
• encourage the managements of educational institutio ns in both the public and private 
sectors to allocate adequate resources in a time-bound manner for infrastructure, equipment 
and trained staff to provide all students with a minimum prescribed standard of facilities for 
a minimum number of selected sports and games;  
• encourage the managements of educational institutio ns in both the public and private 
sectors to optimally utilize their sports facilitie s by making them available on commercial 
terms during off-hours or week-ends or vacations to  local communities/youth/sports clubs 
for regular practice, or to reputed players to run coaching academies, or to reputed 
organizations to conduct tournaments and other competitions.  
 
96. On the sports academies, the officials informed  that the present system of nurseries, 
academies and wings would be thoroughly over hauled . The sports nurseries would be converted 
into junior sports academies. In the academies only  Sports Talent Hunt Test [Sports and physical 
exercises evaluation and development test] qualifie rs and players with proven record who are 

already undergoing coaching would be admitted.  The  sports wing would be converted into Sports 
Championship and Competition Centres. In the sports  championship and competition centres only 
medal winners at the state level would be admitted.   Services of sports psychologists and 
motivators shall be made available to help sportspe rsons develop mental stamina and temperament 
required for competitive events. Sportspersons in t hese academies and centre would also be 
provided support services in sports nutrition and diet, sports kinetics and sports injury management 
etc.  There would be substantial increase in the nu mber of sports academies in the State to 
accommodate all the willing SPEED (Sports and physi cal exercises evaluation and development) 
test qualifiers. Presently there are thirty three n urseries and fifteen academies in operation. Their 
number would be increased to around two hundred academies in the state. Every block will have at 
least one sports academy.  
 
97. The officials of Haryana Government submitted t hat for promoting excellence in the games 
in which the sportsmen from the state have performed exceeding well at National and International 
level, ‘Sports Centre of Excellence’ would be set up for selected games. To start with s uch 
centres shall be set up for boxing, wrestling, foot ball, cricket, basketball and kabaddi etc., which 
will be classified as priorty games.  State would s upport to setup a network of national academies 
in collaboration with Sports Authority of India, na tional federations and private sector in the state 
to train players for international competitions. Th ree national academies viz. National Academy 
for Boxing, National Academy for Athletics and Nati onal Academy for Wrestling have already 
been sanctioned by Government of India and are like ly to be operational by March 2015. The state 
would endeavour to make maximum advantage of these institutes of international standard and 
would strive for maximum number of participant from the state. 
 
98. The officials of Haryana Government in their in teraction submitted that reorganization of 
Medal winning sportspersons by way of cash award is  the most effective way of promoting 
excellence in sports. Such awards will enhance thei r prestige and motivate them to perform better. 
The cash award and other incentives to be given to the medal winners of national and international 
competition by the Sports Department are to be enha nced. The awards would be given to 
sportspersons for their outstanding performance in sports. Now the cash award to medal winners 
will be given ranging from Rs. 6 crore to Rs. 20,00 0/- depending upon the nature of 
events/championship,i.e, Olympics, Asian Games, Com monwealth Games etc. Amount of cash 

award for each member of position holder team will be equivalent to the amount to be given to the 
position holder of individual events. The scope of awards shall be suitably increased/modified and 
notified by the state government from time to time.  Coaches of the medal winner will also be 
rewarded for which it is proposed to bring a separate scheme. 
  
Eligibility & conditions for cash award:-  
 
The sportspersons must have represented the state o f Haryana in the national team, in case of 
national level competitions. Players shall be given  awards for the performance of preceding 
financial year only. No award for past performance/ achievements will be considered. Applications 
should be received through District Sports & Youth Affairs Officer concerned. The cash award 
will only be given to those sportspersons who has r epresented the state of Haryana in any sports 
The sportsperson or parents of the sportsperson sho uld be resident/domicile of Haryana. He/she 
must submit Haryana resident Certificate (Domicile Certificate) from competent Authority along 
with application. 
 
99. On the issue of financial support for infrastru cture development and cadet support to 
mother institution, the officials of Haryana Govern ment added that a scheme would be formulated 
to identify mother institution of the medal winning  sportsperson who participated in international 
events. If these athletes qualify for the cash awar d scheme then the mother institution would be 
given financial support to the tune of 10 percent o f the award value for the infrastructure and 
equipment support to budding sportsperson in that i nstitution.  The employees will also be given 
incentives of increment who secure first, second an d third position in recognized 
national/international competitions in post appoint ment achievements. An insurance scheme for 
the players would be formulated to insure them agai nst sports accidents, sports injuries and other 
exigencies. The Officials further added that a pens ion scheme will be designed to give a clear cut 
message to all those talented sportspersons who wan t to become champions at international level 
that government along with appreciation of their ac hievement would also provide concrete life-
time assistance in the form of a pension. The need for assured monthly income through annuity for 
outstanding sportspersons has become imperative due  to the fact that sportspersons spend prime of 
their youth in pursuit of intensive training, sacri ficing other lucrative opportunities which are 
usually available.  Honorarium and pension shall be  given to Arjun Awardees, Dyanchand 

Awardees and Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratan Awardees from the state in addition to the incentives 
given by Government of India.  For medal winning pl ayers in the International competitions, out 
of turn plot allotment scheme would be prepared by HUDA. (announced by Chief Minister 
Haryana at the time of Release of Haryana Sports & Physical Fitness Policy 2015). 
 
100. The officials informed that Committee that Bhi m Awards is the highest award of the State 
government for the outstanding players of the Harya na. The award is given to 11 sportspersons of 
the State; 5 in individual events, 3 in team events  and 2 to paralympic sportspersons and for 
mentally challenged sportspersons. The award will b e given once in life to sportspersons of the 
Haryana State, based on previous four years achieve ments. The criteria for the award will be 
rationalised and transparent selection procedure wo uld be evolved.  On the pattern of Bhim 
Awards for senior players, State award for the juni or players will be instituted in the name of 
Eklavya Award. The awards will be given every year to five junior sportspersons of the State; 3 in 
individual events and 2 in team events. The ward wi ll be given once to sportspersons of the 
Haryana State based on previous two years achieveme nts. The award will comprise of cash 
amount of Rs. One lakh, momento, scroll, blazer & tie/scarf.  An award for lifetime contribution in 
sports for men in the name of Maharana Pratap award  will be given every year. The award will 
comprise of cash amount of Rs.2 lakh, momento, scro ll, blazer & tie/scarf.  An award for lifetime 
contribution in sports for women in the name of Ran i Laxmi Bai award will be given every year. 
The award will comprise cash amount of Rs.2 lakh, m omento, scroll, blazer & tie/scarf.   An 
annual award for coaches in the name Guru Vashisht award will be given to one outstanding coach 
whether working in the Govt. or in private sector for the exemplary service rendered for excellence 
in sports. In the earlier policy also there was a m ention of annual award for coaches amounting to 
Rs. One lakh, but it was not put in practice. The a ward will comprise of cash amount of Rs.2 lakh, 
momento, scroll, blazer & tie/scarf. 
 
101. The officials further added that special coach  development programme would be initiated 
so that sports coaches assist athletes in developin g to their full potential and are able to discharge  
responsibility effectively for training athletes in  a sport by analyzing their performances, 
instructing in relevant skills and by providing encouragement. State Government recognize that the 
role of the coach are many and varied, from instruc tor, assessor, friend, mentor, facilitator, 
demonstrator, adviser, supporter, fact finder, moti vator, counselor, organizer and planner. The 

programme will aim to develop capacity in the coach es to create the right conditions for learning 
to happen and to find ways of motivating the athlet es and to generate excitement and enthusiasm 
in them. The programme will empower coaches to assi st athletes to prepare training programs, 
communicate effectively with athletes, assist athle tes to develop new skills, use evaluation tests to 
monitor training progress and predict performance. High performance coaches will be given 
training in the quality institutions/coaching centr es both within India and abroad.  All block level 
stadiums shall be provided one coach each. All dist rict level stadiums will have coaches in 
minimum five sports disciplines. A system for evalu ation for performance of coaches will be put 
in place so as to make coaches accountable. Every c oach will be given a sports academy in his 
own discipline and his performance evaluation will be based on output and performance of the 
nursery.  The Department/Sports Council shall also hire coach es on contract basis to provide 
coaching of desired standard with the clearly defin ed deliverables. In various disciplines where 
either coaches are not available in the department or only very few coaches are available for such 
games, coaches would be recruited/engaged on contract basis. 
 
102. The Committee observes that the State of Harya na has not yet submitted the 
utilisation certificates amounting to Rs. 3,34,84,1 78/-.  The Committee, therefore, feels that 
the Department of Sports should take up this issue with the State Government of Haryana.  
The Department should insist on the submission of U Cs by the State Government of 
Haryana on different policies and schemes in promot ion of sports and sportspersons on an 
urgent basis and the Committee expects a status Note in this regard within a month. 
TARGET OLYMPIC PODIUM SCHEME  
103.  The officials of Department of Sports/SAI sub mitted that Ministry of Youth Affairs and 
Sports (Department of Sports) have formulated ‘NSDF Target Olympic Podium (TOP) Scheme’ in 
the National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) with th e objective of identifying and supporting 
potential medal prospects for 2016 and 2020 Olympic  Games.  Focused disciplines will be 
Athletics, Archery, Badminton, Boxing, Wrestling and Shooting.  
The main objectives  of the fund are as under: 
/head2right To administer and apply the moneys of the Fund for promotion of sports in general and 
specific sports disciplines and individual sportspe rsons in particular for achieving 
excellence at the National and International level; 

/head2right To impart special training and coaching in relevant  sports disciplines to sportspersons, 
coaches and sports specialists; 
/head2right To construct and maintain infrastructure for promotion of sports and games; 
/head2right To supply sports equipments to organizations and in dividuals for promotion of sports and 
games; 
/head2right To identify problems and take up research and devel opment studies for providing support 
to excellence in sports; and 
/head2right To promote international cooperation, in particular , exchanges which may promote the 
development of sports 
/head2right To provide low interest or interest free loans for projects and activities related to any of the 
aforesaid objects. 
 
Council and Executive Committee of NSDF 
104. The Fund is managed by a Council constituted b y the Central Government.  Union Minister 
in charge of Youth Affairs and Sports is the Chairp erson of the Council and the Members of the 
Council include Senior Officers of the Department, representatives of apex industry bodies, Sports 
Promotion Boards of some organizations etc.   The C ouncil decides all policy matters relating to 
the Fund and frame rules and regulations for the ma nagement of the Fund.  The Council was last 
reconstituted in March 2012.  The last meeting of the Council was held on 04.06.2015. 
 
105. The day to day working of the Fund is managed by an Executive Committee.  Secretary 
(Sports) is the President of the Executive Committe e.  49 meetings of the Executive Committee 
have been held so far. The Executive Committee was last constituted in May 2014. 
106. Guidelines have been formulated, with the appr oval of the Council-NSDF, in order to 
streamline the procedure in NSDF Secretariat.  Thes e are intended for general guidance in 
processing proposals under NSDF without compromisin g the in-built element of flexibility 
available in the Scheme.  Any relaxation, in conformity with the special status/nature of NSDF and 
in public interest, is to be made with the approval of the Chairperson of the Council. 
 
107. The NSDF has given financial assistance to top  level sportspersons, who are medal 
winning prospects in Olympics, Commonwealth Games, Asian Games and other international 
competitions, for their customized training, both i n India and abroad; NSDF has also given 

assistance to Sports Federations for the preparatio n of teams for international competitions and 
other organizations. The other major area of assist ance is for creation of sports infrastructure.The 
NSDF has continued the assistance to potential sportspersons, who are medal prospects, with stress 
on the athletes selected under Target Olympic Podium (TOP) Scheme.  
 
108. The selected athletes have to sign an ‘Athlete  Grant Agreement’ which covers aspects like 
the privileges and obligations on the part of the a thlete and the Department of Sports/NSDF, code 
of conduct etc. The selected athletes are expected to give due recognition to the support given by 
the Department/NSDF; they may have to appear in spe cified promotional events being organized 
by the Department and the partners of the Scheme. T hough the TOP Scheme takes care of the 
normal requirement for customized training, the ath letes are free to take assistance from other 
sources for any additional items/facilities provide d these are not available under other general 
schemes of the Department. 
109. Based on the recommendations of the Identifica tion Committee, 97 Athletes and 09 Para 
Athletes (Total 106) have been selected so far. The  selection was made after a process of research 
and consultation with the concerned stakeholders by  the Committee. Total budget earmarked for 
the said 106 athletes is about Rs 50.00 Crore till Olympics 2016. The budget amount depends on 
each discipline of sports and the status (elite or emerging) of the athletes.121 sportspersons in 
various sports disciplines have been sponsored so f ar by the NSDF for their customized training 
(individual/group) under coaches of international repute as given below: 
S No Sports Discipline No of Sportspersons (Includi ng 
athletes under TOP Scheme) 
1 Athletics 15 
2 Archery  16 
3 Badminton 6 
4 Boxing 6 
5 Chess 4 
6 Equestrian 1 
7 Gymnastics 9 
8 Shooting 25 
9 Squash 5 
10 Swimming 2 
11 Tennis  9 
12 Wrestling  10 
12 Winter Games  4 
13 Yachting  3 

14 Para Athletes 6 
                                            Total 1 21 
 
The NSDF beneficiaries include Olympics Medalists ( Shri Abhinav Bindra: Gold Medal in 
Shooting Beijing Olympics 2008; Col Rajyavardhan Ra thore: Silver Medal in Shooting Athens 
Olympics 2004 and Ms MC Mary Kom: Bronze Medal in B oxing London Olympics 2012), World 
Champions (Ronjon Sodhi: Shooting, Ms Heena Sidhu: Shooting) etc.  
 
110. The NSDF assistance covered several other spor tspersons indirectly when assistance was 
given to National Sports Federations in various dis ciplines (like Tennis, Judo, Rowing, Boxing, 
Wrestling and Athletics) for organizing group train ing/camps as part of preparation of players for 
Olympics/Asian Games.   
 Outcomes and Progress:  
111. The selected athletes will be provided financi al assistance for their customized training at 
Institutes having world class facilities and other necessary support.  Benchmark for selection of 
athletes under the scheme will be in relation to in ternational standards.  There will be annual/semi-
annual review of performance of selected athletes. 
112. A Committee namely, ‘TOP Scheme Elite Athletes  Identification Committee’ has been 
constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri Anurag T hakur, M.P. for laying down elaborate norms 
for selection of the right candidates, review of pe rformance and operation of the scheme.  Shri 
Rahul Dravid, Shri Pullela Gopichand, Shri Abhinav Bindra and Ms MC Mary Kom are among 
other members in the Committee.  As on 28 
th  April 2015, the Committee, after detailed 
deliberations, has decided on athletes in the following disciplines for assistance under the scheme: 
(i)         Athletics (19 athletes) (Athletes for 4 x400 Women’s Relay Team and Race 
Walking Team are yet to be identified) 
(ii)        Archery (16 archers) (yet to be identified) 
(iii)       Badminton (6 Players) 
(iv)       Boxing (8 boxers) 
(v)        Shooting (17 shooters) 
(vi)       Wrestling (7 wrestlers) 
(vii)      Yachting (2 sailors) 
  

113.  The officials submitted that 36 athletes have  so far agreed to join the Scheme. 20 have 
submitted their programmes. Some of these programme s have been approved and assistance has 
started flowing to the athletes. India Infrastructu re Finance Company Limited (IIFCL), a PSU 
under the Ministry of Finance, has agreed to contri bute Rs. 30 crore to National Sports 
Development Fund (NSDF) by contribution of Rs. 10 c rore per annum for next three years.  
Contribution of Rs. 10 crore for 2015-16 has alread y been received.  Customized training at 
Institutes having world class facilities and other necessary support is being provided to the elite 
athletes, which would result in improved performanc e and a higher position in medals tally for the 
Country in international sports events and mega-sports events. 
  
STATUS OF TARGET OLYMPIC PODIUM SCHEME  
 
114. As on 20th March, 2015, 45 athletes have been identified from 6 disciplines namely 
athletics, badminton, boxing, shooting, wrestling a nd sailing have been identified as potential 
medal winners for Olympics 2016. Around 30 more ath letes are to be identified from archery and 
athletics. Out of the said 45 athletes, consent via email has been sent by 37 athletes, 23 have signed 
the agreement and 18 have given their programs / re quests for preparation for Olympics 2016. The 
programs received from athletes are vetted by the c oncerned National Sports Federation, coaches 
and experts. Based on the said feedback around Rs. 1 crore has already been released for 6 athletes 
namely Vikas Gowda (athletics), Abhinav Bindra, Hee na Sidhu, Manavjit Singh Sandhu, 
(shooting) , Aishwarya and Varsha (sailing). Furthe r around Rs. 88 lakhs is in the pipeline to be 
released shortly subject to submission of clarifica tions / documents by athletes from archery, 
shooting, wrestling and athletics. 
 
115.  All athletes are being contacted proactively by the Department to submit their programs for 
grant of financial assistance. Total estimated budg et for supporting 75 athletes from TOP scheme 
is around Rs. 40 to 45 crores till Olympics 2016. T he said support is over and above the support 
being provided by the Department under Scheme of assistance to NSFs through SAI.  
 
116. The Committee on the basis of deliberations wi th PSUs/PSBs for promotion of Sports 
reiterates its views that Public and Private Sector  Undertakings as well as Banks / Financial 
Institutions etc., may be encouraged by the Departm ent of Sports/SAI to adopt one Sports 

Discipline or can take total responsibility of scouting talents and its nurturing including their 
participation in various National and International  Events. On the reciprocal basis, the 
concerned donor should have its Nominee in the conc erned National Federal/Association. 
The Committee is seized of the fact that, GAIL has orally committed that they would adopt 
one Centre of SAI.  The ONGC has proposed to suppor t Wrestling players.  Further M/s 
Damodar Valley Corporation has also offered to supp ort two athletes under Target Olympic 
Podium (TOP) Scheme for which requisite information  as requested by them has been 
furnished to them.  The Committee directs that the Department of Sports and SAI should 
nominate an exclusive Nodal Officer in each region for co-ordinating with PSUs/PSBs so that 
they can contribute to the NSDF as well as adopt a Sports Discipline/Game or a Centre. The 
Committee directs the Department of Sports/SAI to submit  a monthly progress report to the 
Committee to this effect. 
 
117. The Committee is seized of the fact that many of the outstanding sportspersons of 
yesteryears are living in penurious circumstances.  The Committee desires that the 
Department of Sports should prepare a database of s uch players so that initiative may be 
taken by the Department of Sports to alleviate the financial condition of such sportsperson of 
yesteryears who have won medal or participated in N ational/International 
events/Championships by providing lump sum financia l assistance/lifelong pension facility, 
etc.  The Committee expects to send a progress report in this regard within a month. 
 
118. The Committee on the basis of its deliberation s with sportsperson and various stake 
holders in the field of sports decided to assess th e rate of employability of sportspersons in 
the country.  The Committee, therefore, desires tha t the Department of Sports should 
prepare basic database on the current status of emp loyment in Central Government/State 
Government departments, their PSUs, and PSBs  of sp ortspersons representing and winning 
medals in national/international events/championshi ps.  A status note is required to be sent 
to the Committee within a month. 
 
 
 
 
 

CONCLUSION 
 
 
119. The countdown for Rio Olympics 2016 is not far  away and this biggest sporting event will 
be watched around the world.  Indian Sports will ge t a chance to script history by their medal 
winning performance, after the toil of sportsperson  for the best part of four years and more.  In 92 
years of journey between 1924 and 2016, India has t he honour of one solitary individual gold 
medal in its kitty .  In a Country of such a humongous sports potentia l, the Committee hopes 
that this record can only get better.  The Committe e notes that we have to realize that where 
we stand for Rio 2016.  The performance of Indian c ontingent in the previous participation 
in Olympics is mostly about failure.  It is merely a question of when and where our 
sportsperson failed and blame game, as usual, where  accusations are exchanged among the 
involved people who refuse to accept any responsibi lity.  The defeat and losses bring 
disappointment.  The first and foremost question to  be asked is whether team or 
sportsperson fell short of expectations on account of poor training, exposure and  lack of 
amenities.  The Department of Sports/SAI, National Sports Federations etc., are in the 
process of zeroing in on the sportspersons possessi ng the medal winning prospects.  Keeping 
in view the breakdown of Indian contingent in past Olympics, the Committee expects the 
sportspersons to stand up to the pressure of Olympi cs and not to give a below par 
performance. 
   
****** 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(I)  VISIT TO HYDERABAD 
 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Comm ittee on Human Resource 
Development undertook a study visit to Hyderabad fr om 27 
th  to 29 th  October, 2015 to assess 
the performance of National Sports Development Fund  (NSDF), promotion of sports and 
recruitment of sportspersons in Public Sector Banks and Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs). 
            (Para 5) 
 
 From the deliberations of the Committee with CPSUs , it has come to notice that 
CPSUs are not adequately familiar with the existenc e of the National Sports Development 
Fund (NSDF) and they are by and large linking  the NSDF with CSR activities.  The 
Committee, therefore, directs the Department of Spo rts as well as the Sports Authority of 
India to take all possible measures immediately to educate all the CPSUs on the difference 
between NSDF and their role in CSR so that funds ca n be mobilized for NSDF without any 
further delay.  The Committee notes that the way th e CPSUs are participating on 
development and promotion of sports can be made mor e rationalized and contributing to the 
broad-basing of National Sports.  The Committee als o notes with anguish that this issue was 
also pointed out in its pervious Report on the same  subject, however, no action seems to have 
been taken in this regard and in case the awareness  and familiarity about the NSDF among 
the CPSUs continue to languish as on date, the very  purpose of the NSDF would be defeated 
and the Department of Sports /Sports Authority of I ndia would be responsible for the failure 
on their parts to popularize the same.      (Para 1 8)  
 
 The Committee, after its deliberations with PSBs, feels that though there are Sports 
Control Boards in these Banks, yet they are not awa re of the requirement for contribution to 
the National Sports Development Fund for promotion of excellence in sports, as well as 
board-basing of sports. The Committee notes that th e Department of Sports and the Sports 
Authority of India have not properly familiarized N SDF to them and the role required from 

them in this regard.   The Committee appreciates th e periodic encouragement given by 
Banks to sports as well as sportspersons in the for m of holding tournaments/sports events,   
cash awards, contribution as sponsorships, etc.  Ho wever, co-ordination with Department of 
Sports/SAI is lacking.  The Committee recommends th at Department of Sports/SAI should 
make concerted efforts in co-ordinating with them i n promotion of sports in the perspective 
of extant National Sports Policy and encouraging th em to make contribution to the National 
Sports Development Fund.        (Para 25) 
         
 The Committee notes that the State Governments get s fund assistance for promotion 
of sports from the Central Government through the D epartment of Sports and the need and 
identification of projects are made under different  extant schemes.  The Committee 
recommends that it would be an appreciative move if  the Department of Sports and the SAI 
interact with the State Governments for encouraging  the recruitment of sportspersons in 
vacancies arising out in the domain of State Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana 
covering their autonomous units as well.  The Commi ttee directs to provide a status note in 
this regard from the Department of Sports within a month.    (Para 28) 
 
 The Committee took serious note of this fact.  The  Committee feels that these budding 
sportspersons who have been pursuing the Gymnastics  from the very young age need to be 
nurtured and encouraged.  The Committee is surprise d to note this sorry state of affairs in 
management and recommends that the respective autho rities of SAI are required to take 
cognizance of the plight of budding Gymnastic sport spersons and make sure that these 
students are shifted back to the Saroornagar Indoor  Stadium or should be provided hostel 
facilities at Gachibowli itself so that they pursue their studies and games simultaneously. 
           (Para 31) 
II. VISIT TO SONEPAT 
 
 The Committee also undertook a study visit to Sone pat on 18 
th  November, 2015 to 
assess the performance of National Sports Developme nt Fund (NSDF), promotion of sports 
and recruitment of sportspersons in Public Sector B anks and Public Sector Undertakings 
and PSUs.          (Para 32) 
 

 The Committee felt that the facilities of Wrestlin g and Boxing are praise worthy, 
which is responsible for this Centre bringing out s o many World renowned Sports-persons. 
However, this excellence needs to be replicated for  other Sports disciplines too. The 
Committee feels that the Athletics Tracks and turf for hockey need to be improved and 
brought at par with the International level incorpo rating the latest technology and sports 
facilities. The Committee also felt that in view of  the forthcoming Rio Olympics in 2016, the 
Sports Authorities should focus more on the medal p rospective sports disciplines like 
Wrestling, Boxing, Weight-lifting, Athletics etc., where India traditionally have been strong, 
though other disciplines should also be given its f air share of attention so as to bring laurels 
for the Country.         (Para 37) 
 
III VISIT TO CHANDIGARH AND PATIALA 
 
 The Committee also undertook a study visit to Chan digarh and Patiala from 18 
th  to 
21 st  November, 2015 to assess the performance of Nation al Sports Development Fund 
(NSDF), promotion of sports and recruitment of spor tspersons in Public Sector Banks and 
Public Sector Undertakings and PSUs.      (Para 38)  
 
 The Committee recommends that SAI should provide m ore funds to NIS, Patiala for 
the purchase of equipments so that there are no sho rt-comings in the efforts being put in by 
these athletes for the upcoming Olympics Games, 201 6.  The Committee also recommends 
that an Indoor Stadium for Athletics should be buil d for the year and practice for athletes.  
The Committee also directed NIS, Patiala to have in terface with (State Bank of Patiala) SBP 
and other PSUs in Punjab for sponsorship and adopti on of certain events and players who 
have been shortlisted for International event.  The  State Bank of Patiala (SBP) had promised 
to help the centre.  The Institutes may identify th e areas where these PSUs are able to 
provide financial assistance.  The Committee was al so apprised that to participate in certain 
international events, players needed coaching in fo reign centres.  However, due to shortage 
of funds this was not possible.  The Committee feel s that the medal winning prospects should 
be given coaching in foreign centres and shortage o f funds should not come in the  way.  The 
Committee was also apprised that in Fencing there are many medal winning prospects. 
           (Para 51) 

 
 
 
 The Committee directed the Chief Engineer (NZ-1) an d the Superintending Engineer, 
CPWD, to prepare a proposal for renovation/repair o f sports infrastructure at NSNIS, 
Patiala by taking inputs from the coaches concerned  and to see that it is as per International 
standards and submit to the Department of Sports for approval .           (Para 53)  
 
 
 The Committee held discussions with CPSUs in Chandi garh which included  Bharat 
Heavy Electrical Limited (BHEL), Food Corporation o f India (FCI), Indian Railway 
Catering & Tourism Corporation (IRCTC), Metals and Minerals Trading Corporation of 
India (MMTC), National Buildings Construction Corpo ration (NBCC), Steel Authority of 
India Limited (SAIL), National Seeds Corporation Li mited (NSCL) and National Hydro-
electric Power Corporation (NHPC) along with author ities of Department of Sports on 
Promotion of Sports and Recruitment of Sportspersons in PSUs.          (Para 54) 
  
The Committee held discussions with Punjab National  Bank (PNB), Oriental Bank of 
Commerce (OBC), Punjab and Sindh Bank(P&SB), and In dustrial Finance Corporation of 
India (IFCI) at Chandigarh on the performance of Na tional Sports development Fund and 
Promotion of Sports and recruitment of Sportspersons in Banks.                         (Para 75) 
 The Committee appreciates the efforts undertaken b y the PSUs and PSBs to promote 
sports. Some of the PSUs like SAIL, BHEL etc. and B anks have invested a lot in the 
development of sports in the Country. However, the Committee observes that most of the 
PSUs and PSBs have no definite sports policy for pr omotion of sports in the Country and 
recruitment of sportspersons. It was brought to the  notice of the Committee that most of the 
PSUs are following the directives of Central Government which are issued from time to time. 
The Committee is unhappy to note that most of the P SUs are not aware of National Sports 
Development (NSDF). Also no funds from CSR are allo cated for promotion of sports. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that Sports Aut hority of India (SAI) should 
undertake efforts to make all PSUs and Banks aware of this fund so that more contribution 
can be put forward for the promotion and developmen t of sports in the Country. The 

Committee also observes that SAI needs to tie up wi th the concerned agencies so that a 
definite sports policy can be adopted by the PSUs a nd Banks for promotion of sports in the 
perspective of the National Sports Policy, 2001, wh ich envisage promotion of excellence in 
Sports and also broad-basing of Sports. Further, a policy needs to be formulated so that 
certain percentage of the funds earmarked for CSR a ctivities can be allotted for the 
promotion and development of sports in the Country.  The recruitment of Sportspersons in 
PSUs/PSBs are being done as per the Guidelines of D oPT, which stipulates reservation upto 
5% in existing vacancies. This implies that there i s no minimum Cap for employment of 
Sportsperson in the said Guidelines. The Committee,  therefore, strongly recommends that 
DoPT should make necessary amendments in the Guidel ines for recruitments of 
Sportspersons so that the mandatory 5% quota of Spo rtspersons of arising vacancies is filled 
up.                  (Para 86) 
 
 The Committee held discussion with the State Gover nments of Punjab and Haryana 
and the Administration of Union Territory of Chandi garh along with authorities of 
Department of Sports on Promotion of Sports and Recruitment of Sportspersons in PSBs. 
           (Para 87) 
Eligibility & conditions for cash award:-  
 
 The Committee observes that the State of Haryana h as not yet submitted the 
utilisation certificates amounting to Rs. 3,34,84,1 78/-.  The Committee, therefore, feels that 
the Department of Sports should take up this issue with the State Government of Haryana.  
The Department should insist on the submission of U Cs by the State Government of 
Haryana on different policies and schemes in promot ion of sports and sportspersons on an 
urgent basis and the Committee expects a status Note in this regard within a month.  
           (Para 102) 

STATUS OF TARGET OLYMPIC PODIUM SCHEME  
 
 The Committee on the basis of deliberations with P SUs/PSBs for promotion of Sports 
reiterates its views that Public and Private Sector  Undertakings as well as Banks / Financial 
Institutions etc., may be encouraged by the Departm ent of Sports/SAI to adopt one Sports 
Discipline or can take total responsibility of scouting talents and its nurturing including their 
participation in various National and International  Events. On the reciprocal basis, the 
concerned donor should have its Nominee in the conc erned National Federal/Association. 
The Committee is seized of the fact that, GAIL has orally committed that they would adopt 
one Centre of SAI.  The ONGC has proposed to suppor t Wrestling players.  Further M/s 
Damodar Valley Corporation has also offered to supp ort two athletes under Target Olympic 
Podium (TOP) Scheme for which requisite information  as requested by them has been 
furnished to them.  The Committee directs that the Department of Sports and SAI should 
nominate an exclusive Nodal Officer in each region for co-ordinating with PSUs/PSBs so that 
they can contribute to the NSDF as well as adopt a Sports Discipline/Game or a Centre. The 
Committee directs the Department of Sports/SAI to submit  a monthly progress report to the 
Committee to this effect.              (Para 116) 
 
 The Committee is seized of the fact that many of t he outstanding sportspersons of 
yesteryears are living in penurious circumstances.  The Committee desires that the 
Department of Sports should prepare a database of s uch players so that initiative may be 
taken by the Department of Sports to alleviate the financial condition of such sportsperson of 
yesteryears who have won medal or participated in N ational/International 
events/Championships by providing lump sum financia l assistance/lifelong pension facility, 
etc.  The Committee expects to send a progress report in this regard within a month.  
              (Para 117) 
 The Committee on the basis of its deliberations wi th sportsperson and various stake 
holders in the field of sports decided to assess th e rate of employability of sportspersons in 
the country.  The Committee, therefore, desires tha t the Department of Sports should 
prepare basic database on the current status of emp loyment in Central Government/State 
Government departments, their PSUs, and PSBs  of sp ortspersons representing and winning 

medals in national/international events/championshi ps.  A status note is required to be sent 
to the Committee within a month. (Para 118) 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The countdown for Rio Olympics 2016 is not far away  and this biggest sporting event 
will be watched around the world.  Indian Sports wi ll get a chance to script history by their 
medal winning performance, after the toil of sports person for the best part of four years and 
more.  In 92 years of journey between 1924 and 2016 , India has the honour of one solitary 
individual gold medal in its kitty.  In a Country o f such a humongous sports potential, the 
Committee hopes that this record can only get bette r.  The Committee notes that we have to 
realize that where we stand for Rio 2016.  The perf ormance of Indian contingent in the 
previous participation in Olympics is mostly about failure.  It is merely a question of when 
and where our sportsperson failed and blame game, a s usual, where accusations are 
exchanged among the involved people who refuse to a ccept any responsibility.  The defeat 
and losses bring disappointment.  The first and for emost question to be asked is whether 
team or sportsperson fell short of expectations on account of poor training, exposure and  
lack of amenities.  The Department of Sports/SAI, N ational Sports Federations etc., are in 
the process of zeroing in on the sportspersons poss essing the medal winning prospects.  
Keeping in view the breakdown of Indian contingent in past Olympics, the Committee 
expects the sportspersons to stand up to the pressure of Olympics and not to give a below par 
performance.                        (Para 119) 
   
****** 
 
 
 