179th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/179thReport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
HUNDRED SEVENTY-NINTH REPORT
ON
THE SIKKIM UNIVERSITY BILL, 2006
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23RD NOVEMBER, 2006)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 23RD NOVEMBER, 2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2006/AGRAHAYANA, 1928 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                     
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                               
3.                  REPORT        
4.         OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE          
5.         MINUTES
6.         ANNEXURES
7.         The Sikkim University Bill, 2006                                                                                                                    
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2006-07)
         
1.      Shri Janardan Dwivedi              ¾                    Chairman
            MEMBERS
            RAJYA SABHA
2.
      Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3.      Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4.      Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
5.      Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
6.      Smt. Brinda Karat
7.      Shri S. Anbalagan
8.      Shri Uday Pratap Singh
9.      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
10.  Shri Ali Anwar
LOK SABHA
11.  Shri Ashok Argal
12.  Shri Basudeb Barman
13.  Shri Harishchandra Chavan
14.  Shri Harisinh Chavda
15.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
16.  Shri R. L. Jalappa
17.  Shri Ramswaroop Koli
18.  Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
19.  Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
20.  Smt. Archana Nayak

179th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/179thReport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
21.  Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
22.  Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
23.  Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
24.  Shri Chengara Surendran
25.  Dr. Thokchom Meinya
26.  Shri K. Virupakshappa
27.  Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
28.  Shri Francis K. George
29.  Shri Anantkumar Hegde
30.  Shri Rahul Gandhi
31.  Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji, B., Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development,
having been authorised by the Committee, present this Hundred Seventy Ninth Report of the Committee on the Sikkim
University Bill, 2006.
 
2.         In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman,
Rajya Sabha, referred the Sikkim University Bill 2006, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 31 st July 2006, and
pending therein, to the Committee on the 4th August, 2006 for examination and report.
3.         The Committee considered the Bill in its two sittings held on the 8th September and the 18th September, 2006.
4.         On the 18 th September 2006, the Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Secondary and Higher
Education on the Sikkim University Bill, 2006.  The Committee also took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill
and adopted the draft report with amendments in clauses 5(ix), 5(xix), 21(1), 22(2), 23(2), 24(2), 25, 26, 30(1)(i), 30(1)
(k), 35(3), 39, 42 and 46 of the Act and clauses 2(1), 2(2), 9, 17, 18(2), 29(1) and 39(1) of the Statutes.
 
4.                  The Committee while considering the report, relied on the following:
 
(i)                  Background Note on the Bill received from the Department of Secondary and Higher Education;
(ii)                Note on the clauses of the Bill received from the Department of Secondary & Higher Education;
(iii)               Verbatim record of the oral evidence taken on the Bill; and
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 2, dated 31st July, 2006.
2. Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No. 43348 dated 4th August, 2006.
 
(iv)              Presentation made and clarification given by the Secretary of the Department of Secondary and Higher
Education.
 
6.         On behalf of the Committee, I would like to thank the officials of the Department of Secondary and Higher
Education for providing necessary inputs and clarifications during the consideration of the Bill.
 
7.         For facility of reference, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
at the end of the report.
 

179th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/179thReport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
NEW DELHI;
September , 2006
Asvina, 1928 (Saka)
JANARDAN DWIVEDI
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development
REPORT
 
The Sikkim University Bill, 2006 seeks to establish and incorporate a teaching and affiliating University in the state of
Sikkim by the name ‘Sikkim University’ with a view to cater to the needs and aspirations of the people of the State and
to minimize the imbalance in educational facilities in the North Eastern Region.
2.         According to the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, there is no university in Sikkim and the
colleges of the state are affiliated to the North Bengal University of West Bengal.  These are mostly degree colleges and
are following the courses and syllabi designed by the North Bengal University, which do not meet the specific
requirements of the state of Sikkim.  Due to lack of post-graduate courses in Sikkim, majority of the students do not get
opportunity to pursue higher studies.  But the Sikkim government, with its limited resources, is not in a position to
provide adequate funding for the establishment and running a university of its own.  Besides, existence of a good
number of central universities in other States of the region, viz., at Kohima, Silchar, Tezpur, Aizawl, Imphal and
Shillong has caused a huge imbalance in educational facilities within the region, and a consequent migration of teachers,
students and researchers in search of better infrastructural and academic facilities to other States.
3.         The Committee was informed that the University Grants Commission (UGC) had commissioned the Educational
Consultants India Limited (Ed.CIL) to assess the existing facilities for higher education in Sikkim and also to determine
the likely growth in the student strength/enrolment in the next 2-3 years and the requirement for creation of necessary
structure to cater to those needs, either by extending the jurisdiction of the North Eastern Hill University, Shillong or by
establishing a state university or a central university in the state.  According to the report of Ed.CIL/UGC, establishment
of a central university would be the most viable option to cater to the higher education needs of the state.
4.         Accordingly, the Sikkim University Bill 2006 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha for the establishment and
incorporation of the Sikkim University, Gangtok as a central university. The Bill is broadly based on the pattern of the
University of Manipur, the most recent of the North-Eastern Universities.
5.         The salient features of the aforesaid Bill are as under:-
The Bill seeks to establish and incorporate a teaching and affiliating university in the state of Sikkim under the proposed
Central Act by the name of 'Sikkim University' with perpetual succession and common seal and to provide for the
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
The University would be a teaching and affiliating university with its Headquarters at Gangtok and territorial
jurisdiction extending to the whole of the State of Sikkim.
It would function broadly on the pattern of the existing central universities, particularly of those of the North-Eastern
region.
The annual accounts of the University shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and shall be
laid before both Houses of Parliament along with the audit report and the annual report of the University.
During the transitional period, the appointment of the first Officers and the constitution of the first Authorities of the
University would be made by the Visitor for specified terms.
 
6.         The Committee after going through all the papers and documents and hearing the Secretary, Department of
Secondary and Higher Education took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.   It suggested the following
amendments/additions to various clauses of the Bill.
Clause 5(ix)
7.1       Clause 5(ix), page 3, provides that the University shall have the power ‘to appoint persons working in any other
University or organization as teachers of the University for a specified period.’
7.2       The Committee is of the considered opinion that the word ‘organization’ in this clause leaves some scope for
different interpretations. The Department clarified that the word ‘organization’ generally meant ‘a teaching or a research
institution, other than a university.’  The Committee feels that this needs to be specified in the Bill with a view to
remove any ambiguity about the nature of the organization.
Clause 5(xix)
8.1       Clause 5(xix), page 4, provides that the University shall have the powers ‘to confer autonomous status on a

179th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/179thReport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
College or an Institution or a Department, as the case may be, in accordance with the Statutes.’
8.2       The Committee feels that the provision of the clause amounts to giving unbridled powers to the University for
conferring autonomous status on a College, an Institution or a Department.  The Committee is of the opinion that some
kind of requirements and conditions necessary for making an institution autonomous may be specified. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that Clause 5(xix) may be suitably amended.
Clause 21 (1)
9.1       Clause 21(1), page 7, provides that the constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.  The Committee however, notes that the Statutes appended to the Bill do not provide for the
constitution of the Court as well as the term of office of its members.
9.2       The Committee feels that the Court being the apex body of the university, provision for its constitution and term
of office of its members be provided in the first statutes itself.
Clauses 22(2), 23(2), 24(2), 25 and 26
10.1     Clause 22(2), page 8, provides that the constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members
and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
10.2     Clause 23(2), page 8, provides that the constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members
and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
10.3     Clause 24(2), page 8, provides that the constitution of the College Development Council, the term of office of its
members and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
10.4     Clause 25, page 8, provides that the constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.
10.5     Clause 26, page 8, provides that the constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.
10.6     The Committee notes that the Executive Council, Academic Council, College Development Council, Board of
Studies and Finance Committee are the important decision-making bodies of the University.  The Statutes appended to
the Bill contain provisions only about the powers and functions of these bodies but are silent about their constitution and
term of office.
 
10.7     The Committee, therefore, recommends that the provisions for the constitution and term of office of the
Executive Council, Academic Council,  College Development Council, Board of Studies and Finance Committee, also
be included within corpus of the first Statutes itself.
 
Clause 30(1)(i)
11.       Clause 30, page 10, deals with power to make Ordinances. The Committee finds that this sub-clause provides for
making special arrangements ‘for the residence, discipline and teaching of women students.’  The Committee is of the
considered opinion that while this is valid in terms of residence and specific courses for women students, the word
‘discipline’ in this clause appears to be discriminatory; hence unnecessary. Accordingly, the Committee recommends
that the word ‘discipline’ be deleted from clause 30 (1) (i), page 10 of the Bill.
Clause 30(1)(k)
12.       This Clause provides for co-operation and collaboration by the proposed University with other universities,
institutions and other agencies. The Committee feels that the words ‘other agencies’ leave ample scope for associating
with agencies which might be private and for profit.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words ‘not for
profit’ may be appropriately added in page 10, line 25 of Clause 30 (1) (k).
Clause 35(3)
13.1     Clause 35(3), page 11, provides that the decision of the Tribunal, in respect of any dispute arising out of the
contract between the University and an employee, shall be final and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the
matters decided by the Tribunal.
13.2     The Committee feels that Clause 35(3) gives an impression that the employees are debarred from all other
judicial remedies against the decision of the Tribunal.  The Committee is aware that no Act can debar the remedies
available under Articles 226 and 32 of the Constitution.  The Bill also does not intend to do this.  The Committee,
however, recommends that the following explanation may be added in the said Clause for removing the erroneous
impression in this regard.
‘This does not preclude the employees from availing the remedies provided under Articles 226 and 32 of the
Constitution’
Clause 35 (3) may, accordingly, be amended.

179th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/179thReport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
Clause 39
14.       Clause 39, page 12, provides for the final authority in respect of any question regarding election or appointment
of a member of any authority or other body of the University.  The Committee notes that the Bill nowhere mentions
about an elected membership of any authority of the University.  The Committee is of considered opinion that ideally,
the composition/membership of these bodies should have been provided in the Statute itself as was done in the case of
Allahabad University. In view of the fact that the composition of authorities of the university would be subsequently
decided by the university bodies, the Committee wishes to emphasize the need for having elected elements in all the
bodies/authorities of the university.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable mention for the purpose be
made in the Bill at appropriate places.  The Committee further recommends that an enabling provision must be provided
in the Act itself to ensure democratization of various bodies of the University.
Clause 42
 
15.1     Clause 42, page 12, provides that no suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any officer or other employee
of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions
of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.
15.2     The Committee feels that the words ‘good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions of
this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances’ are vague and leaves scope for misuse as interpretation of ‘good faith’ could be
subjective. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the ambit of the words ‘good faith or intended to be done in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances’ may be spelt out in clear terms.
Clause 46
16.       Clause 46, page 13, pertains to Transitional Provisions. The Committee is of the considered opinion that since
the first officers and authorities of the university are to be appointed or nominated by the Central Government, their
term of offices as provided in transitional provisions should not be long enough. The Committee notes that in some
cases it is five years and in others it is three years.  It, therefore, recommends that the term of office of the first
Chancellor, the first                 Vice-Chancellor as well as other officers and bodies provided in various            sub-
clauses of Clause 46 on page 13 should be reduced from five and three years to three and two years respectively.
THE SCHEDULE
Clauses 2(1) and 2(2) of the Statutes
17.1     Clause 2(1), page 14, of the Statutes provides for the appointment of the                         Vice-Chancellor by the
Visitor from a panel of not less than three persons who shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted under
clause (2).
17.2     Clause 2(2), page 14, provides that the Committee referred to in clause (1) shall consist of three persons, out of
whom two shall be nominated by the Executive Council and one by the Visitor and the nominee of the Visitor shall be
the Convenor of the Committee.
17.3     The Committee finds that the Statute is silent about the background of the persons to be placed on the panel for
appointment as Vice-Chancellor. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the background of the persons who could
be placed on the panel for appointment as Vice-Chancellor of the University may be indicated in the Bill itself.  The
Committee further recommends that a nominee of the Court should also be included in the Selection Committee for
appointment to the post of Vice-Chancellor.
Clauses 9 of the Statutes
18.       Clause 9, page 19, of the Statutes provides for the appointment of a Librarian of the University.  The Committee,
however, notes that the retirement age for the post of Librarian has not been provided for in the Clause.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Librarian’s retirement age should also find place in the Bill.
Clause 17 of the Statutes
19.       The Committee notes that in case of the ‘Finance Committee’, while its composition has been given, there is no
representation from the University Court in this committee. The Committee opines that University Court being an
important body should have representation in the Finance Committee. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a
new sub-clause ‘at least one person to be nominated by the Court’ may be added immediately after line 43 of Clause 17
of the Statutes on page 21 of the Bill.
 
Clause 18(2) of the Statutes
 
20.1     Clause 18 (2), page 22, provides that a Selection Committee for appointment to the post of Professor shall
consist of the Vice-Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor, Dean of the School and Head of the Department.

179th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/179thReport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
20.2     The Committee is aware that the Heads of the Department are appointed generally by seniority and rotation. It
could, therefore, be possible that a Reader happens to be the Head of the Department when the process for appointment
to the post of Professor is underway.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words ‘if he is a professor’ may
be appended to (ii) of Column 2 of Table against the heading ‘Professor’.
Clause 29(1) of the Statutes
21.1     Clause 29(1), page 26, provides that all powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and disciplinary action
in relation to the students of the University shall vest in the Vice-Chancellor.
21.2     Clause 36(1), page 11, of the principal Act provides that any student or candidate for an examination whose
name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the orders of the Vice-Chancellor, Discipline Committee or
Examination Committee, as the case may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the
University for more than one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution
by him, appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify and reverse the decision of the
Vice-Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.
21.3     The Committee feels that the provisions of Clause 29(1) of the Statutes and Clause 36(1) of the principal Act
appear to be contradictory.
21.4     The Committee, therefore, recommends that the provisions of the Clauses may be suitably re-drafted to remove
the inherent contradictions, if any.
Clause 39(1) of Statutes
22.       The Committee is of considered opinion that the Act must provide for elected representation of students,
teachers and non-teaching staff in all authoritative bodies of the University and ensure their right to form associations. 
However, the Committee found no such provision for students.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words
‘two elected representatives of students’ should find place in the constitution of the Student Council and Clause 39, page
29, be re-drafted accordingly.
23.       The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any amendments.
24.       The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
25.       The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the amendment additions suggested
by it.
26.       The Committee would like the Department to submit a note with reasons on the recommendations/suggestions,
which could not be incorporated in the Bill.
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
Clause 5(ix)
The Committee is of the considered opinion that the word ‘organization’ in this clause leaves some scope for different
interpretations. The Department clarified that the word ‘organization’ generally meant ‘a teaching or a research
institution, other than a university.’  The Committee feels that this needs to be specified in the Bill with a view to
remove any ambiguity about the nature of the organization.(para 7.2)
Clause 5(xix)
The Committee feels that the provision of the clause amounts to giving unbridled powers to the University for
conferring autonomous status on a College, an Institution or a Department.  The Committee is of the opinion that some
kind of requirements and conditions necessary for making an institution autonomous may be specified. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that Clause 5(xix) may be suitably amended.(para 8.2)
Clause 21 (1)
The Committee feels that the Court being the apex body of the university, provision for its constitution and term of
office of its members be provided in the first statutes itself.(para 9.2)
Clauses 22(2), 23(2), 24(2), 25 and 26
The Committee notes that the Executive Council, Academic Council, College Development Council, Board of Studies
and Finance Committee are the important decision-making bodies of the University.  The Statutes appended to the Bill
contain provisions only about the powers and functions of these bodies but is silent about their constitution and term of
office.(para 10.6 )
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the provisions for the constitution and term of office of the Executive
Council, Academic Council, College Development Council, Board of Studies and Finance Committee, also be included
within corpus of the first Statutes itself.(para  10.7)
Clause 30(1)(i)
The Committee finds that this sub-clause provides for making special arrangements ‘for the residence, discipline and

179th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/179thReport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
teaching of women students.’ The Committee is of the considered opinion that while this is valid in terms of residence
and specific courses for women students, the word ‘discipline’ in this clause appears to be discriminatory; hence
unnecessary. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the word ‘discipline’ be deleted from clause 30 (1) (i), page
10 of the Bill.(para 11)
Clause 30(1)(k)
The Committee feels that the words ‘other agencies’ leaves ample scope for associating with agencies which might be
private and for profit.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words ‘not for profit’ may be appropriately
added in page 10, line 25 of Clause 30 (1) (k).
(para 12)
Clause 35(3)
The Committee feels that Clause 35(3) gives an impression that the employees are debarred from all other judicial
remedies against the decision of the Tribunal.  The Committee is aware that no Act can debar the remedies available
under Articles 226 and 32 of the Constitution.  The Bill also does not intend to do this.  The Committee, however,
recommends that the following explanation may be added in the said Clause for removing the erroneous impression in
this regard.
‘This does not preclude the employees from availing the remedies provided under Articles 226 and 32 of the
Constitution’
Clause 35 (3) may, accordingly, be amended.
(para 13.2)
Clause 39
The Committee notes that the Bill nowhere mentions about an elected membership of any authority of the University. 
The Committee is of considered opinion that ideally, the composition/membership of these bodies should have been
provided in the Statute itself as was done in the case of Allahabad University. In view of the fact that the composition of
authorities of the university would be subsequently decided by the university bodies, the Committee wishes to
emphasize the need for having elected elements in all the bodies/authorities of the university.  The Committee,
therefore, recommends that suitable mention for the purpose be made in the Bill at appropriate places.  The Committee
further recommends that an enabling provision must be provided in the Act itself to ensure democratization of various
bodies of the University.(para 14)
Clause 42
The Committee feels that the words ‘good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act,
the Statutes or the Ordinances’ is vague and leaves scope for misuse as interpretation of ‘good faith’ could be
subjective. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the ambit of the words ‘good faith or intended to be done in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances’ may be spelt out in clear terms.(para 15.2)
Clause 46
The Committee is of the considered opinion that since the first officers and authorities of the university are to be
appointed or nominated by the Central Government, their term of offices as provided in transitional provisions should
not be long enough. The Committee notes that in some cases it is five years and in others it is three years.  It, therefore,
recommends that the term of office of the first Chancellor, the first Vice-Chancellor as well as other officers and bodies
provided in various sub-clauses of Clause 46 on page 13 should be reduced from five and three years to three and two
years respectively.(para 16)
 
THE SCHEDULE
Clauses 2(1) and 2(2) of the Statutes
The Committee finds that the Statute is silent about the background of the persons to be placed on the panel for
appointment as Vice-Chancellor. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the background of the persons who could
be placed on the panel for appointment as Vice-Chancellor of the University may be indicated in the Bill itself.  The
Committee further recommends that a nominee of the Court should also be included in the Selection Committee for
appointment to the post of Vice-Chancellor.(para 17.3)
Clauses 9 of the Statutes
The Committee recommends that the Librarian’s retirement age should also find place in the Bill.(para 18)
Clause 17 of the Statutes
The Committee opines that University Court being an important body should have representation in the Finance
Committee. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a new sub-clause ‘at least one person to be nominated by the
Court’ may be added immediately after line 43 of Clause 17 of the Statutes on page 21 of the Bill.(para 19)

179th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/179thReport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
Clause 18(2) of the Statutes
The Committee is aware that the Heads of the Department are appointed generally by seniority and rotation. It could,
therefore, be possible that a Reader happens to be the Head of the Department when the process for appointment to the
post of Professor is underway.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words ‘if he is a professor’ may be
appended to (ii) of Column 2 of Table against the heading ‘Professor’.                                               (para 20.2)
Clause 29(1) of the Statutes
The Committee feels that the provisions of Clause 29(1) of the Statutes and Clause 36(1) of the principal Act appear to
be contradictory.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the provisions of the Clauses may be suitably re-drafted
to remove the inherent contradictions, if any.(paras 21.3 and 21.4)
Clause 39(1) of Statutes
The Committee recommends that the words ‘two elected representatives of students’ should find place in the
constitution of the Student Council and Clause 39, page 29, be re-drafted accordingly.(para 22)
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
                                                                                             II
                                                                                SECOND MEETING
         The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 a.m. on Monday, the      18
th September 2006 in
Committee Room `D', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.                     
          MEMBERS  PRESENT
 
Shri Janardan Dwivedi              ¾                    Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
Smt. Brinda Karat
Shri S. Anbalagan
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
LOK SABHA
Shri Ashok Argal
Shri Basudeb Barman
Shri Harishchandra Chavan
Shri Harisinh Chavda
Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
Shri Ramswaroop Koli
Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
Smt. Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
Shri Chengara Surendran
Dr. Thokchom Meinya
Shri K. Virupakshappa
Dr. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
Shri Francis K. George
Shri Anantkumar Hegde
SECRETARIAT
            Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
            Shri N.K. Singh, Director
            Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
            Shri Swarabji  B., Committee Officer
  

179th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/179thReport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
WITNESSES
***
Department of Secondary and Higher Education
1.         Shri Sudeep Banerjee               Secretary
2.         Shri Sunil Kumar                      Joint Secretary
3.         Shri R.D. Sahay                        Deputy Secretary
4.         Shri S.S. Mahlawat                   Under Secretary
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the new Members who were recently nominated to the Committee.        
                                    ***
3.                                                                     ***
4.                                                                     ***
5.         The Committee reassembled at 2.30 p.m. and heard the Secretary, and other representatives of the Department of
Secondary and Higher Education on different clauses of the (i) Rajiv Gandhi University Bill, 2006; (ii) Sikkim
University Bill, 2006; and (iii) Tripura University Bill, 2006. The Chairman and Members of the Committee sought
clarifications from the representatives of the Department of Secondary and Higher Education on Bills under
consideration, to which the officials responded.  The Committee adopted the Reports on the said Bills with some
modifications.
6.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 4.05 p.m.
___________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matter.