 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
303 
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRD REPORT 
 
Demands for Grants 2018-19 (Demand No. 99) of the  
 Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th March, 2018) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th March, 2018) 
 

 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
THREE HUNDRES AND THIRD REPORT 
 
Demands for Grants 2018-19 (Demand No. 99) of the  
 Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th March, 2018) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th March, 2018) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) 
 


C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …...........................................................  (i)-(ii) 
2.         INTRODUCTION................................................................................................................  (iii) 
3.  ACRONYMS ……….......…............................................................                               (iv) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…............................ 
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE ...   
6. MINUTES.............................................................................................. ................    
7. ANNEXURES.................................................................................................. ..   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2017) 
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya      Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
4. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
5. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
6. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
7. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
8. Dr. Sasikala Pushpa 
9. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
10. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat 
12. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman 
13. Shri Nihal Chand 
14. Shrimati Bhawana Gawali  (Patil) 
15. Shri Faggan Singh Singh Kulaste 
16. Shrimati Geetha Kothapalli  
17. Prof. Chintamani Malviya 
18. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra 
19. Shri Ramachandran Mullappally  
20. Shrimati Neelam Sonker 
21. Shri Hari Om Pandey 
22. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
23. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
24. Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
25. Shri M.I. Shanavas 
26. Dr. Nepal Singh   
27. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh 
28. Shri Satyapal Singh 
29.       Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
30.       Shri P.R. Sundaram 
31.       Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

           SECRETARIAT 
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary 
Shri K.Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer 
Shri Mohit Misra, Section Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby 
present this Three Hundred and third Report of th e Committee on the D emands for Grants (Demand No. 
99) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports for the year 2018-19.  
2.  The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the Ministry 
of Youth Affairs and Sports and also heard the Secretary and other Officials of the Ministry of Youth 
Affairs and Sports on the said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 26 th and 27 th February, 2018. 
Besides, the Committee, while making its observations/recommendations, has also relied u pon the 
following:- 
(i) Detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports for the year 
2018-19; 
(ii) Detailed Explanatory Notes on the Demands for Grants (2018 -19) received from the 
Ministry and the agencies/attached offices of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports; 
(iii) Annual Report of the ministry for the year 2017 -18 and the latest available Annual Reports 
of the agencies/attached offices of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports; 
(iv) Written replies furnished by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports to the Questionnaires 
sent to it by the Secretariat; and 
(v) Written clarifications to the points/issues raised by Members in the meetings of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretaries  an d the  officers of Ministry of 
Youth Affairs and Sports for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the requisite information in 
connection with the examination of Demands for Grants of the Ministry. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
5.  The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on the 7 th 
March, 2018.  
 
 
 
(iii) 
NEW DELHI 
March 7, 2018 
Phalguna 16, 1939 (Saka) 
  
 
DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on  Human Resource Development                                                                    

ACRONYMS 
 
1. ASGO  Assistance to Scouting & Guiding Organisations 
2. CTP  Commonwealth Youth Programme 
3.  IC  International Cooperation 
4. INSTAL Scheme for Identification and Nurturing of Sports Talent 
5. LNIPE  Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education 
6. NYKS: Nehru Yuva Kendra Sanghathan 
7. NYLA: National Youth Leadership Awards 
8. NYLP:  National Young Leadership Programme 
9. NSS  National Service Scheme 
10. NPYAD National Programme for Youth and Adolescent Development 
11. NDS  National Discipline Scheme 
12. NSS:  National Service Scheme 
13. NSTSS National Sports Talent Search Scheme 
14. NDTL  National Dope Testing Laboratory 
15. NYAC: National Youth Advisory Council 
16. NSDF   National Sports Development Fund 
17. NYC :  National Youth Corps 
18. NADA  National Anti-Doping Agency 
19. PYKKA Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiyan 
20. RGNIYD:  Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development 
21. RYSK  Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakram 
22. RGKA  Rajiv Gandhi Khel Abhiyan 
23. SAI  Sports Authority of India 
24. SFC  Standing Finance Committee 
25. USIS  Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme  
26. UAV  United Nations Volunteers 
27. UNDP  United Nation Development Programme 
28. WADA World Anti-Doping Agency 
29. YFDP:  Youth For Development Programme 
30. YH :  Youth Hostels 
(iv) 

REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
OVERVIEW OF THE MINISTRY AND ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS 
 The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports consists of two separate Departments, viz. Deptt. 
of Youth Affairs and Department of Sports. The Department of Y outh Affairs has one subordinate 
office, i.e., the National Service Scheme (NSS) and also two autonomous organizations, namely 
Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) and Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth 
Development (RGNIYD) at Sriperumbudur in Tamil Nadu. 
2. The Govt. of India has made significant investment on programmes for the youth, through 
various schemes/ programmes covered under different Ministries/ Departments, including, of 
course, the Department of Youth Affairs. In addition, the State Govern ments and a host of other 
stakeholders are also working to support youth development and to enable productive youth 
participation. 
3. The following autonomous organizations function under the administrative control of 
Department of Sports: 
(i) Sports Authority of India (SAI); 
(ii) Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education (LNIPE), Gwalior, Madhya 
Pradesh; 
(iii) National Anti-Doping Agency (NADA) and; 
(iv) National Dope Testing Laboratory (NDTL) 
 
4.  The specific subjects being dealt by the Deptt . of Sports, as specified in the second 
schedule of the Govt. of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 include Sports Policy, Sports 
and Games, National Welfare Fund for Sportsmen, Netaji Subhas National Institute of Sports, 
Sports Authority of India,  Matters relating to the Indian Olympic Association and national Sports 
Federations, Participation of Indian Sports teams in tournaments abroad and participation of 
foreign sports teams in International tournaments in India, National Sports Awards includin g 
Arjuna Awards, Sports Scholarships, Exchange of sportspersons, experts and teams with foreign 
countries, Sports infrastructure including financial assistance for creation and development of such 
infrastructure, Financial assistance for coaching, tourname nts, equipment, etc., Sports matters 
relating to union territories and  Physical education. 

5. The Ministry has started the Umbrella scheme ‘Khelo India’ with the objectives of Mass 
participation of young population in sports through annual sports competit ions, identification of 
Sporting talent, nurturing of the sporting talent through sports academics, creation of sports 
infrastructure at block, district and State/UT level etc. 
6. For India, the main challenge is to take fullest advantage of its inherent s trengths like, huge 
youth population, genetic diversity and geographical diversity; to ensure convergence of all stake -
holders; and to establish a robust sports eco -system. Further, sports is a State subject where there 
are multiple stakeholders like, Unio n, States, IOA, Sports Federations, Athletes, NGOs, different 
Sports Promotion Boards, etc, who have  to work together for holistic sports development in 
national perspective.  
7. The total budget allocation (BE) for the Ministry for the year 2017 -18 was R s. 1,393.21 
crore. At RE (2017 -18), this amount remained the same. For the year 2018 -19, the projected 
demand was Rs.2193.05 crore against which Rs.1575.15 crore has been allocated at BE stage.   
                                                                                                                               (Rs in crores) 
Years Projected Demand BE RE Expenditure 
Actual 2015-16 1872.802 1005.48 942.46 941.20 
Budget 2016-17 1839.43 900.00 984.15 981.54 
Revised 2017-18 3287.96 1393.21 1393.21 987.58* 
Budget 2018-19 2193.05 1575.15   
*Expenditure till 31st January, 2018. 
 
 
  

CHAPTER – II 
DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND ITS MAJOR INITIATIVES, POLICIES AND 
SCHEMES. 
1. The Secretary in his presentation before the Committee on the 27 th February, 2018 gave an 
overview of functioning and status of different schemes being undertaken by the Department of 
Youth Affairs.  The Committee was apprised of the projected demand, percentage of utilization 
and under-utilization for the years 2015-16,  2016-17 and 2017-18 (till 31st January, 2018) as given 
under: 
PLAN 
Statement indicating details of projections of outlays for the schemes to be undertaken by the Department 
during the Three year Action Agenda i.e.  2015-16, 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19(Till 31th Jan 2018) 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Projected 
Demand  
BE RE Expenditure % of 
Expenditure 
w.r.t RE 
% of under 
utilization 
1. 2015-16 677.53 384.00 369.38 366.87 99.32 0.68 
2. 2016-17 1417.50 500.00 428.00 402.22 93.98 6.02 
3. 2017-18 904.73 550.00 544.95 448.61* 82.46 17.54 
4. 2018-19 873.51 621.20         
*Expenditure till 31st Jan 2018 
     
                                                     
NON-PLAN 
      Statement indicating the projected Demand, allocation, Expenditure, Percentage of utilization  and under 
utilization for the year 2015-16 and 2016-17 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Projected 
Demand  
BE RE Expenditure % of Expenditure 
w.r.t RE 
% of under 
utilization 
1. 2015-16 89.24 75.00 84.00 75.58 89.98 10.02 
2. 2016-17 102.22 96.00 101.75 98.90 97.20 2.80 
(* Expenditure till 18th February, 2018) 
Note: With effect from 2017 -18, Plan and Non -Plan have been 
Merged. 
 
2.  It was informed about the budget constraints faced by the Deptt. which  is indicative from 
the above that the Budget Allocation (BE) have been much lower than the Projected Demand, year 
after year. Not only that, the BE has often been reduced further at RE stage, not because of 
inability of the Department to utilize the funds , but due to overall budgetary constraints of the 
Government. The utilization of funds in terms of actual expenditure has been consistently very 

high, year after year, of the Revised Estimates till last year. During current financial year, 82.46% 
of the Re vised Estimates has already been spent and it is expected that the budget allocation will 
be fully utilized by the end of this financial year. 
3.  Further, the Department vide its replies to questionnaire on the examination of DFG 2018 -
19, stated that the total BE for the Department for 2018 -19 is Rs. 621.20 crore. It works out to be 
less than 0.005% of GDP. However, this should not be seen as an indicator of expenditure incurred 
by the country on the youth. A number of Central Ministries/ Departments run p rogrammes for the 
youth and so do the State Governments and others stakeholders. For instance, almost the entire 
expenditure of the Department of Higher Education is meant for the youth. In fact, during the 
formulation of National Youth Policy, 2014, an at tempt was made to map the expenditure being 
incurred on youth by various Ministries/ Departments and it was ascertained that as many as 37 
Central Ministries/Departments incurred total expenditure of over Rs. 90,000 crore on programmes 
directly or indirect ly benefitting the youth, of which share of Department of Youth Affairs was 
less than Rs. 300 crore.  
4. The Committee observes that the Ministry has been allocated Rs.621.20 crore at BE 
2018-19, whereas it was Rs.544.95 crore at RE 2017 -18 i.e. there is a n increase of 13%.  The 
Committee finds that trend of percentage of utilization in last three financial year is good 
and hopes that remaining 17% of budget will be utilized by the Ministry before the 
conclusion of the current financial year. 
5. In addition, the Department informed that with effect from 01.04.2016, all the Schemes of 
the Department have been restructured as follows: 
S. 
No 
Names of Schemes 
(Before Restructuring) 
Names of Schemes 
(After Restructuring) 
1.  Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan NYKS) Merged into a new ‘umbrella’ 
Scheme called “Rashtriya Yuva 
Sashaktikaran Karyakram 
RYSK)”.  
2.  National Youth Corps (NYC) 
3.  National Programme for Youth & Adolescent Development 
(NPYAD)  
4.  International Cooperation 
5.  Youth Hostels (YH) 
6.  Assistance to Scouting & Guiding Organisations 
7.  National Discipline Scheme (NDS) 
8.  National Young Leaders Programme (NYLP)  
9.  National Service Scheme (NSS) National Service Scheme (NSS) 
10.  Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development 
(RGNIYD) 
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of 
Youth Development (RGNIYD) 

 
  

6.  The projected demand, allocation and expenditure in respect of the schemes of the 
Department for the year 2017-18 are as shown below: 
Statement indicating the Projected Demand, Allocation and Expenditure for 2017-18 
 (Rs. in crore) 
S. 
No. 
Name of the  Scheme Projected 
Demand 
Budget 
Estimates 
Revised 
Estimates 
Actual* 
 
1. Rashtriya Yuva 
SashaktikaranKaryakram (RYSK) 
a) Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan 
b) Scouting and Guiding 
c) National Youth Corps 
d) International Cooperation 
e) Youth Hostels 
f) National Young Leaders 
Programme (NYLP) 
g) National Programme for Youth 
and Adolescent Development 
(NPYAD) 
h) National Discipline Scheme 
 
Sub-Total (1) 
 
 
360.44 
 
1.50 
95.56 
16.30 
3.00 
100.00 
 
35.00 
 
 
10.00 
 
621.80 
 
 
215.00 
 
1.50 
60.00 
16.00 
1.50 
25.00 
 
18.00 
 
 
5.00 
 
342.00 
 
 
225.54 
 
1.50 
60.00 
18.00 
1.62 
14.14 
 
24.00 
 
 
5.00 
 
349.80 
 
 
166.82 
 
0.38 
42.98 
11.93 
0.99 
0.00 
 
17.08 
 
 
2.50 
 
242.68 
2. National Service Scheme 175.50 144.00 146.12 104.09 
3. Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of 
Youth Development 
80.00 36.00 22.00 14.75 
4. Secretariat – Social Service 
Expenditure  
27.43 28.00 27.03 22.31 
 Total 904.73 550.00 544.95 383.83 
* as on 31.01.2018 
7. The Committee observes the expenditure pattern of different schemes run by the 
Department of Youth Affairs.  The Committee finds that the speed of expenditure is little 
slow and a major chunk has been kept for the last quarter of the financial year.  The 
Committee is unable to understand that against a projected demand of Rs.904.73 crore for 
the year 2017-18, it got Rs.550.00 crore at BE which was further reduced to Rs.544.95 crore 
at RE and the Department still has more  than Rs.150 crore to spend.  The Co mmittee feels 
that there is a disconnect between projected demand and expenditure.  The Committee 
therefore, recommends that the Department should take a cautious approach while making a 
projection and the allocation should also be spent in a time bound manner. 
8. Moreover, for the year 2018 -19, following is the tabular statement indicating Projected 
Demand and financial outlay for these schemes :- 

  

(Statement indicating the Projected Demand, Allocation and Expenditure for 2018-19 
 (Rs. in crore) 
S. 
No. 
Name of the  Scheme Projected 
Demand 
Budget 
Estimates 
Actual 
 
1. Rashtriya Yuva SashaktikaranKaryakram 
(RYSK) 
a) Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan 
b) Scouting and Guiding 
c) National Youth Corps 
d) International Cooperation 
e) Youth Hostels 
f) National Young Leaders Programme 
(NYLP) 
g) National Programme for Youth and 
Adolescent Development (NPYAD) 
h) National Discipline Scheme 
Sub-Total (1) 
 
 
471.30 
1.50 
93.65 
16.00 
1.60 
25.00 
 
25.00 
 
 
10.00 
644.05 
 
 
255.00 
1.50 
80.00 
20.00 
1.70 
20.00 
 
25.00 
 
 
5.00 
408.20 
 
2. National Service Scheme 174.00 160.00  
3. Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth 
Development 
23.00 23.00  
4. Secretariat – Social Service Expenditure  32.46 30.00  
 Total 873.51 621.20  
Note: With effect from 2017-18, PLAN and NON-PLAN have been merged. 
Hence, all the eight schemes of the Department that were operating as standalone Schemes, 
will now operate as componenets of a single cohesive Scheme, which will help in achieving better 
synergy in implementation of these Schemes. All the Schemes are Central Sector Schemes. 
9. The Committee observes that under Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakaram 
(RYSK) there are 8 components and each component has got allocation separately.  Out of 
total projected demand of Rs.644.05 crore, the Ministry has got Rs. 408 crore only and the 
maximum cut has been affected in Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan i.e. only Rs.255 crore out 
of a demand of Rs.471.30 crore.  The Committee feels that it may affect  the programmes of 
NYKS adversely.  The Committee recommends that all the pro grammes of different schemes 
may run in coherence and budget may be distributed as and where required so that the work 
gets done on time.  The Committee further recommends that if the budget is required more 
than the allocated at BE 2018-19 it may be taken up at the RE stage. 
RASHTRIYA YUVA SASHAKTIKARAN KARYAKRAM (RYSK) 
10.   The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on HRD had been emphasizing 
the need for merger/ consolidation of the Schemes of the Department into a few Schemes, to 

improve their effectiveness. The Ministry of Finance, Government of India had also advised the 
Department to restructure the Schemes into a few compact Schemes for better synergy and more 
effective utilisation of resources. Accordingly, the Department unde rtook a comprehensive 
exercise to re -structure/ consolidate all the Schemes being operated by Department of Youth 
Affairs into 3 Schemes as follows:  
 
S. 
No 
Names of the Schemes 
(before restructuring) 
Names of the Schemes 
(after restructuring) 
1.  Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan NYKS) Merged into a new 
‘umbrella’ Scheme called 
“Rashtriya Yuva 
Sashaktikaran Karyakram 
(RYSK)”.  
2.  National Youth Corps (NYC) 
3.  National Programme for  Youth & Adolescent 
Development (NPYAD)  
4.  International Cooperation 
5.  Youth Hostels (YH) 
6.  Assistance to Scouting & Guiding Organisations 
7.  National Discipline Scheme (NDS) 
8.  National Young Leaders Programme (NYLP)  
9.  National Service Scheme (NSS) National Service Scheme 
(NSS) 
10.  Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth 
Development  (RGNIYD) 
Rajiv Gandhi National 
Institute of Youth 
Development  (RGNIYD) 
 
Thus, except NSS and RGNIYD, which have been retained as separate Schemes, the remaining 8 
Schemes have been merged into a single umbrella Scheme called Rashtriya Yuva S ashaktikaran 
Karyakram (RYSK).  Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakram (RYSK)  will, henceforth, be the 
Flagship Programme of the Department for development and empowerment of the youth to enable 
them to realise their potential and in the process, to contri bute to the nation-building process. The 
merger of a number of Schemes into a single flagship scheme, inter -alia, offers the following 
benefits: 
a) Earlier, only NYKS and NYC (which were already integrated administratively) had 
administrative presence at fiel d level. Other Programmes did not have ground presence. 
Hence, their implementation, as standalone programmes, posed problems in effective 
implementation and supervision. Merger of these programmes into the new umbrella 
schemes enables the Department to le verage the administrative structure of NYKS/ NYC 
for effective implementation of other Programmes.  
b) Under NPYAD, assistance is given to NGOs for youth development programmes. 
Integration of this programme with NYKS/ NYC enables the Department to leverage 
NYKS set up for effective monitoring of the activities carried out under the assistance 

given to NGOs. Moreover, it will be possible to ensure that NYKS set up (NYKS offices/ 
National Youth Volunteers and Youth Clubs) and the NGO work in close collaboration  
with each other, which will improve the effectiveness of programme implementation. It 
will also be possible to closely monitor the activities of Scouting and Guiding 
Organisations being assisted by the Department. 
c) The Department has 83 running Youth Hostels, set up with the objective to promote youth 
travel with the country. Youth Hostels are directly managed from the Department. 
Integration of Youth Hostels programme with NYKS will help in effective management of 
Youth Hostels through NYKS functionaries at field level.  
d) ‘International Cooperation’ includes youth exchange programmes with various countries. 
Youth Delegations from various countries visit India and they are taken to various cities for 
showing them place s of interest and arranging their interaction with Indian Youth. 
Integration of these Programmes with NYKS will help in organising these programmes in a 
more effective manner at the field level. 
e) National Young Leaders Programme (NYLP), which has important components including 
neighbourhood youth parliament, shramadaan and youth development through support 
from National Youth Development Fund, will also benefit from complete integration with 
NYKS, since the NYKS administrative set up can then be fully levera ged for effective 
implementation of this Programme. 
f) Since a complete administrative/ implementation structure will be available to the 
Department as part of this flagship scheme, any new initiatives considered necessary, in 
future, for youth development/ e mpowerment, could be taken as part of this umbrella 
scheme, rather than initiating a new small standalone scheme. 
 
In nutshell, 8 Schemes of the Department that were operating as standalone Schemes, will now 
operate as components of a single cohesive Scheme, which will help in achieving better synergy in 
implementation of these Schemes. All the Schemes are Central Sector Schemes and the new 
 Scheme will also be a Central Sector Scheme and hence, there is no change in funding pattern. 
There is also no change in operational guidelines of existing Schemes that are being merged except 
that they will now be implemented in an integrated cohesive manner as parts of a single umbrella 
Scheme. There are no constraints as such. 
11. The Committee is convinced with the s teps taken by the Ministry to restructure the 
schemes for a better coherence and consolidated result.   The Committee feels that even in 
future, the Ministry should desist from starting any scheme as stand alone. 
NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS) 
12. NUKS launched in 1972, is one of the largest youth organizations in the world.  The main 
objective of the programme is to develop the personality and leadership qualities of the youth and 
to engage them in nation building activities.  This is being done throug h promotion of youth clubs.  

The youth enroll as members of these youth clubs.  NYKS reaches these youth clubs and their 
members through various programmes.  NYKS has introduced a simplified procedure of online 
registration of youth clubs.   
13. The Committee was informed that the Department has taken up a new Joint Project with 
UNV/ UNDP for capacity building of NYKS and NSS, namely, “Strengthening of NYKS and 
NSS” w.e.f. 2015-16. The objective is to undertake capacity building of NYKS and NSS officials 
as well as young volunteers, using international expertise of UNV/ UNDP. This is a Pilot Project, 
covering one District in each of the 29 States where NYKS has State Offices. The best practices 
developed here shall be replicated in the entire organisations. The Project is to be implemented 
over 4 -year period. The total cost of the Project is US$ 23,43,434 (i.e. about Rs.15 crores), of 
which the share of the Government of India is US$ 14,93,434 and the share of UNV/ UNDP is 
US$ 8,50,000. A Project Steering Committee, comprising of representatives of the Department of 
Youth Affairs and UNDP/UNV has been constituted to oversee the Project. This Committee 
approves the Annual Work Plan and also monitors progress in implementation of such Plan. To 
supervise day -to-day fun ctioning, there is a National Project Team, comprising of a Project 
Manager, 3 UNV Management Associates.  There are 29 UNV -District Youth Coordinators 
(UNV-DYCs) – one UNV-DYCs for each Pilot District. The UNV -DYCs were provided 4-weeks 
Orientation Training through RGNIYD and have since been working in the field. The Project has 
been under implementation for over a year and the results are very encouraging. The young 
energetic and motivated UNV -DYCs are taking new initiatives in their respective Districts in 
fields such as sanitation and cleanliness, literacy, promoting livelihoods, promoting digital 
transactions, gender equity, health and nutrition, water conservation, youth counselling, disaster 
preparedness, etc. This is in addition to undertaking all th e work of a DYC of NYKS in the 
assigned District. The UNV -DYCs have also brought improvements in the quality of NYKS 
programme implementation. The work of UNV -DYCs, esp. the best practices being developed by 
them, is being regularly documented for further dissemination. In fact, in the UNV Partnership 
Summit in Bonn (Germany) in October, 2016, this Project was held out as a unique example of 
partnership between the UNV and the Government of a country.  NYKS implements a number of 
Programmes in collaboration  with and often with funding from other Central Ministries/ 
Departments, State Government, Organisations, etc.  

(ii) Youth Clubs of NYKS have undertaken various types of coordination activities such as 
Blood Donation, Sapling Plantation, Promotion & Facili tating Villagers to get benefits under 
Prime Minister Financial Inclusion Schemes, Cleaning, Digging, Maintenance, De -silting and 
repair of Ponds, natural drinking water resources, small irrigation channels, water tanks, etc., 
Cleanliness Drive to clean st reets and common places, Cleanliness of Public Statues, Motivation 
resulting into Construction of Toilets for Open Defecation Free (ODF), Providing access of Iron 
Folic Acid Tablet to Adolescent Girls, Motivated Girls and their Parents to postpone  her mar riage 
till attaining 18 yrs., Motivated and Facilitated Institutionalized Deliveries, Immunization of 
Pregnant Mothers, Motivate and Immunization of Children (0 -5 yrs), Enrolment of children in 
schools, Facilitating into getting Voters ID Cards, etc . by m obilizing local resources.  
Furthermore, Youth Clubs  played a vital role to make the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, Swachhata Hi 
Sewa, Swachh Sankalp Se Swachh Siddhi, Celebration of International Day of Yoga, Mission 
Indradhanush and other  important programmes of NYKS- a complete success.  
(iii) It was informed that the concept of Punarjagaran Yatra has its genesis in the vision of 
Hon’ble Prime Minister  about engagement of youth in Nation Building and empowerment as 
leaders in all walks of life. The y earlong Pu narjagaran Programme was launched from the four 
corners of India viz. from Leh (J&K), Okha (Gujarat), Kanyakumari (Tamil Nadu) and Roing 
(Arunachal Pradesh) on 2 nd Oct, 2014, the birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi and culminated 
on 25 th Sept, 2015 at Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay Dham, Nagla Chandrabhan, Mathura , 
U.P.  
 The Yatra covered 10,000 villages in 100 districts of 20 States in the country.   
 A total of 58.18 lakh  people from all cross sections of society received the 
messages of the program through village based activities.  
 59,282 Theme Based activities  were conducted which created awareness and 
motivated youth and communities from 30,386 villages  to avail benefits and 
participate in National Flagship Programs.  
 8,17,804 Youth  and others participated in 9872 Neighborhood Youth 
Parliaments (Participatory Rural Development) activities. 17,232 resource 
persons and specialists mentored the sessions. 
Achievements of Punarjagran Yatra 
 Facilitation in Financial Inclusion Schemes and Skills Development 
o 3,42,304 persons facilitated for opening Accounts  under Jan Dhan Yojana  
o 1,49,854 persons helped in getting PM Jeewan Jyoti Beema Yojana  
o 2,50,993 persons f acilitated for opening Accounts under PM Suraksha Beema 
Yojana  
o 47,664 persons were helped in getting Atal Pension Yojana  

o 7,984 Persons helped in getting Vidhwa Pension Yojana 
o 2,96,506 youth were facilitated to avail the benefit of schemes 
o 75,615 youth were registered for relevant skills training  
 Promotion of Swachh Bharat Mission 
o 1,03,742 households and thereby nearly 150 villages were made Open 
Defecation Free   
o Organized 7,767 cleanliness drives; 9,215 Awareness campaign and 3,676 
activities for Eradication of weeds 
  

 Promotion of Voluntarism  and Social inclusion 
o 75,770 girls enrolled and 4,19,752 parents took oath for Beti Padhao Beti 
Bachao 
o 1,13,338 Youth took oath for blood donation and 19,555 youth donated blood 
o 1,77,948  youth agreed to dedicate 100 hrs. for Shramdaan 
o 16,32,707 saplings planted 
Hurdles faced in the organization of Punarjagaran Programme:-  
 Diminishing number of manpower in the organization is one of the major constraints 
for the execution of the scheme.  
 Lack of direct provision of incentives to youth volunteers for their whole heartedly 
involvement in the programme. 
Following new initiatives are  required to  strengthen this scheme  of  NYKS : 
 Long pending vacant posts at various levels in NYKS may be filled up i n time bound 
manner. 
 Increase in Establishment and Core Programme fund . 
 A corpus fund of Rs. 500 Crore may be provided to NYKS for furtherance of youth 
activities and staff welfare in the country. 
 A certain percentage of IEC Budget and social sector progr ammes in different central 
ministries earmarked for NGOs should be given to NYKS for implementation by 
affiliated Youth Clubs. 
 An Inter Ministerial Coordination Committee needs to be formed at the centre with the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports as the  nodal Ministry for focused attention to the 
youth and convergence of social sector programmes of the Government;  
 Youth Development and Empowerment as a subject should be included in the 
concurrent list of the schedule in the Constitution of India. 
14. The Committee was informed that the total sanctioned strength of NYKS is 2,273 posts, of 
which 1,378 posts are filled-up at present and as on 01.01.2018 (including 19 posts of DYCs filled 
up temporarily by taking officers on deputation and 29 posts filled up  temporarily through 
engagement of UNV-DYCs under the UNV/UNDP Project). The remaining 895 posts are vacant. 
The functioning of NYKS is of perennial nature and the employees especially in the district offices 
are of the bare minimum with only 1 DYC, 1 ACT and 1 MTS. No recruitment since 1998 had 
affected the functioning of NYKS immensely.  
15. A major proportion of vacancies are in the category of District Youth Coordinators (DYCs) 
and Accounts Clerk -cum-Typists (ACTs).   This is adversely affecting work.  DYCs and ACTs 
from the adjoining districts are given additional charge, Even some Dy. Directors are also assigned 
the job of DYC at District level NYK. However, they are unable to do justice to the task on 
additional charge as the nature of job requires continuous interaction with community and physical 

presence.  It was also informed that as vacancy is not uniform  across the states and even regions 
within States, some DYCs and ACTs are holding charge of as many 4 districts for years. Similarly, 
accounts keeping and regular reporting are not possible without full time ACTs. The present 
strength is reducing very fast  every year with employees superannuating. Now, NYKS is 
processing the revival of various posts in NYKS as the same was lying vacant for several years. 
However, process of direct recruit of 26 DYCs based on the current vacancies (from Janury -2016 
to June-2017) has been started through the recruitment agency IBPS.  The process of filling up of 
9 posts of DYCs from the reserved quota of Persons with Disabilities (PWD) has been concluded. 
The appointment of 9 DYCs will be announced soon.        
16. The Committee observes the various projects undertaken by the Nehru Yuva Kendra 
Sangathan with appreciation.  NYKS have been allotted Rs.255 crore for the year 2018 -19 
but the Committee feels that the various types of coordination activities  undertaken by this 
Sangathan may not run effectively if there is a budget crunch.  Hence, the Committee 
recommends that appropriate amount may be allocated under this head for the work.  The 
Committee appreciates that quantum of work completed by NYKS under Punar Jagaran 
Yatra.  The Committee agrees with the suggestions given by the Ministry regarding 
strengthening the programmes under NYKS. The Committee is concerned about the 
decreasing number of manpower in the organization which are affecting the schemes.  The 
Committee recommends that the long time vacant posts in the organization may be filled. 
NATIONAL YOUTH CORPS (NYC)  
17.   The Scheme of National Youth Corps (NYC) was launched in the country during the year 
2010-11 and the same is being implemented  through  NYKS.  The main o bjectives of NYC 
scheme are: 
 To setup a group of disciplined and dedicated youth who have the inclination and spirit to 
engage in the task of nation building.  
 To facilitate the realization of inclusive growth (both social and economic)  
 To act as points for dissemination of information, basic knowledge in the community 
 To act as group modulators and peer group educators  
 To act as role models for the younger cohort especially towards enhancement of public 
ethics, probity and dignity of labour.  

As per the provision of the scheme, a total of 12,000 volunteers in 623 districts are being deployed 
every year.  There is a selection committee under Chairpersonship of DM/DC of the district for 
selecting volunteers.  
(i) It was informed that the N ational Youth Corps (NYC) is a Scheme of the Department, but it is 
implemented through NYKS. Under the Scheme, youth in the age -group of 18 -29 years are 
engaged as ‘National Youth Volunteers’ (NYVs) to serve upto maximum 2 years in nation -
building activities. Normally, 2 NYVs are deployed in each Block. NYVs act as an extended arm 
of NYKS administrative set -up (which has presence upto District level in the form of District 
Nehru Yuva Kendras) for implementation of programmes and initiatives of NYKS. NYKS ha s 
sanction to engage upto 12,000 National Youth Volunteers at any point of time. 
(ii) It was further informed that  the volunteers deployed under NYC scheme are acting as 
extended arms of NYKS.  Besides developing their personality and leadership qualities,  NYKS 
actively involves these volunteers are in motivating and guiding the village-level youth clubs while 
helping in organizing various NYKS programmes.  
(iii) The Committee was further informed that the Honorarium being paid to National Youth 
Volunteers (NYVs) engaged under the Scheme has been increased from Rs.2,500/ - per month to 
Rs.5000/- per month w.e.f. 01.10.2016, after completion of all necessary procedural requirements . 
However, it has not been possible to increase the number of NYVs from 2 NYVs t o 4 NYVs per 
Block, for the time being, in view of the budgetary constraints. 
(iv) Providing employment opportunity/ improving employability is not the main objective of 
NYC Scheme.  The objective is to engage NYVs in nation -building activities for a perio d of two 
years. However, t he NYVs gain valuable experience, working with the community in general and 
youth in particular. It develops their personality and leadership qualities, which opens many 
employment avenues for them.  NYC Scheme also has provision for providing skill training to the 
NYVs, from Scheme funds, towards the end of their 2 -year tenure, so as to help them in finding 
suitable job/ self -employment opportunities. Some volunteers even go for higher studies. NYKS 
also sponsors some NYVs for pos t-graduate courses in RGNIYD. NYVs generally do well in 
finding jobs/ taking up self -employment. However, since employability is not the main objective 
of the Scheme, no Study has been conducted to collect the data on type of employment secured by 
NYVs after successful completion of their term with NYKS.  
18. The Committee feels that the BE for National Youth Corps has been given as Rs.80 
crore.  The Committee is happy to note that the honorarium for National Youth Volunteers 
has been increased from Rs.2500 /- to Rs. 5000/ - per month.  The Committee wants to know 
that the exposure given to National Youth Volunteers giving them benefit or not in making 
their career.  The Committee feels that the Youth is assets for the country and the asset 

cannot be utilized for the sake of benefits only but it can also be given them valuable 
experience for their future. 
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR YOUTH AND ADOLESCENT DEVELOPMENT 
(NPYAD) 
19. National Programme for Youth and Adolescent Development (NPYAD) is a component of 
the Rash triya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakram (RYSK). Under NPYAD, financial assistance is 
provided to Government/ non -Government organisations for taking up activities for youth and 
adolescent development. The assistance under NPYAD is provided under 5 major compone nts, 
namely: 
a) Youth Leadership and Personality Development Training 
b) Promotion of National Integration (National Integration Camps, Inter -State Youth 
Exchange Programmes, Youth Festivals, multi-cultural activities, etc.) 
c) Promotion of Adventure; Tenzing Norgay National Adventure Awards 
d) Development and Empowerment of Adolescents (Life Skills Education, Counselling, 
Career Guidance, etc.) 
e) Technical and Resource Development (Research and Studies on Youth issues, 
Documentation, Seminars/ Workshops) 
Operational Guidelines 
20. The organisations eligible for assistance include all the autonomous organisations whether 
partially or fully funded by the Government, registered societies, trusts, NGOs, Universities, 
Association of Indian Universities, State level Orga nisations, i.e., State Government Departments, 
Panchayati Raj Institutions and Urban Local Bodies, Education Institutions, etc.  The Scheme 
beneficiaries are Youth in the age group of 15 -29 years and Adolescents in the age group of 10 -19 
years. The financi al norms for assistance are laid down in the Scheme for each type of activity 
under the Scheme.  The assistance is sanctioned on the basis of recommendation of the Project 
Appraisal Committee (PAC), headed by Secretary, Youth Affairs. 
21. During last three  years, all the components of the NPYAD Scheme were implemented 
successfully. Assistance to various All -India/ State-level Organisations was sanctioned for taking 
up youth development activities. There are no hurdles/ constraints as such.  
22. The Committee was also informed that during the current fiscal year, out of Rs.18.00 crore 
allocated to NPYAD at RE stage, Rs.17.46 crore have been exhausted as on 22.01.2018. As per 

the scheme guideline, Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) has been nominated as the 
Monitoring and Evaluation Institution for all the programmes under NPYAD Scheme. Thus, the 
activities are being closely monitored through NYKS.  
23.  The Committee observed that for NPYAD, the Ministry has been allocated Rs. 25 
crore of BE 28018 -19 i.e Rs.1 crore more over RE 2017 -18.  The Ministry has exhausted 
almost the entire amount allocated to it.  The Committee hopes that amount allocated to it.  
The Committee hopes that NPYAD will keep on doing good job at their hand. 
  

INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION 
24.  The Committee was apprised that the Department endeavours to create an international 
perspective among youth in collaboration with other countries and international 
agencies/organizations on various youth issues. 
25.  It was informed that the Department a lso collaborates with UN agencies like United 
Nations Volunteers (UNVs)/UNDP and the Commonwealth Youth Programme (CYP) on various 
youth related issues.  Further, it is the endeavour of the Department to constantly monitor the 
execution of the Programmes a nd to improve the quality of implementation of the international 
youth exchange programmes, so that the intended purpose of these programmes, i.e., promoting 
exchange of ideas, values and culture amongst the youth of different countries, with a view to 
develop international perspective among the youth, is achieved.  
26. It was further informed that exchange of Youth Delegations with friendly countries is taken 
up on reciprocal basis for promoting exchange of ideas, values and culture amongst the youth of 
different countries and also to promote peace and understanding. It helps in developing 
international perspective among the youth. Currently, the Ministry has regular ongoing Annual 
Youth Exchange Programmes with  China (200-member delegation), South Korea  (35-member 
delegation), Maldives (50 -member delegation), Sri Lanka (25 -member delegation), Nepal (50 -
member delegation), Bahrain (50 -member delegation), Russia (50 -member delegation). In 
addition, a 100 -member youth delegation from Bangladesh has been visit ing India since the year 
2012.  Further, some programmes take place from time to time, but these are not regular annual 
events. 
27. The Committee was informed that the Ministry has been making serious efforts to start 
more youth exchange programmes. At pre sent, Department of Youth Affairs has Memoranda of 
Understanding with 16  countries, Armenia, Bahrain, Belarus, BRICS Nations (Brazil, Russia, 
India, China and South Africa), Indonesia, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Mozambique, Nepal, Palestine, 
Portugal, Russia, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Vietnam, and Tunisia for International Youth Exchange 
Programmes and for cooperation on Youth matters. 
28. The Committee has been informed that MoU with more number of countries have 
been signed for youth exchange programme.  The Comm ittee hopes that exchange 

programme with other countries will give youth international exposure and such exposure 
will enlighten them on various youth issues. 
 
 
YOUTH HOSTELS 
29. Youth Hostels are built to promote youth travel and to enable the young peopl e experience 
the rich cultural heritage of the country.  The construction of the Youth Hostels is a joint venture 
of the Central and State Governments.  While the Central Government bears the cost of 
construction, the State Governments provide fully develo ped land free of cost with water supply, 
electricity and approach roads.  Youth Hostels are located in areas of historical and cultural value, 
in educational centre, in tourist destinations etc.   Youth Hostels provide good accommodation for 
the youth at reasonable rates. 
30. The Committee was informed that the budget under the Youth Hostel Scheme for 
construction of new Youth Hostels is very limited.  NITI Aayog  i.e. erstwhile Planning 
Commission has suggested that construction of new Youth Hostels may be t aken up only after 
commissioning of on -going nearly completion projects. Accordingly, the budget has not been 
allocated for construction of new Youth Hostels. Further, a meeting was held under the 
chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs with all the stakeholders on 26.04.2017 to 
explore the possibility of running the Govt. Youth Hostel on PPP Model. However, the Deptt. 
didn’t get response from majority of states. Hence, it was deemed not proper to decide the matter 
on our own. There is no sta te-wise allocation of funds for maintenance of Youth Hostels. As per 
Youth Hostel Manual, repair/renovation/maintenance is the responsibility of the State Govt. 
Secretary, Deptt. of Youth Affairs of the State Govt. or the DM/DC are the chairman of the Host el 
Management Committee (H.M.C.) constituted for administering these Youth  Hostels. 
31. The Committee took note of the following Youth Hostels been encroached and used for 
various purposes by the State Governments:  
S. 
No. 
Youth Hostel Encroached/Occupied by 
1.  Yamunanagar (Haryana) Being used by State Govt. of Haryana for various purposes. 
2.  Rewari (Haryana) Sainik School functioning since 2010. 

3.  Sangrur (Punjab) ITI (Girls) was shifted in the Hostel w.e.f. 21.01.2010 and later, 
one acre of the land, earmarked for the Youth Hostel, was 
transferred for construction of ITI buildings 
4.  Amritsar (Punjab), Initially, approval was accorded for the use of Hostel as an 
International Bus Terminal for 2 months (Nov -Dec,2005). Since, 
then State Transport Department has neither paid rent nor vacated 
the premises. 
5.  Darjeeling (West Bengal) The hostel is under the occupation of the Aila refugees. 
6.  Gangtok (Sikkim) University has been shifted to the Youth Hostel and Youth Hostel 
has been shifted to the nearby stadium.  
7.  Dimapur (Nagaland) Rented out to an NGO and presently a private University is 
running from this Hostel. Youth Hostel given on lease to Global 
Open University, Dimapur by the State Government 
8.  Guwahati (Assam) Sports Deptt. has shifted their offices and has provided 
accommodation to their Officers 
 
DO letters have been written by Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs to the Chief Secretary of 
the concerned states to get the encroachment vacated from the Youth Hostel.  
32. The Committee observes that Rs.1.70 crore  has been allocated at BE 2018 -19 fo r 
Youth Hostels which is Rs.10 lakhs more than the projected demand.  The Committee took 
note of the fact that a number of Youth Hostels has been encroached upon by the state 
governments and are being utilized for pruposes like running Sainik school in it,  using it as 
an international bus terminal  or running a private university from it.  The Committee 
expresses  its concern over the issue and urges the department to take up the issues with due 
seriousness with the State Governments and ensure that the You th Hostels are used for the 
purpose they are setup for. 
NATIONAL YOUNG LEADERS PROGRAMME  
33. The Ministry has informed that the major reasons for variation of budget allocation during 
2017-18 and 2018-19 follows: 
 
a) Due to cumbersome procedure for organizing Village Level Neighbourhood Youth 
Parliament, the set physical and financial targets could not be achieved during                  
2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17. 
 
b) After constant follow -up,  during the financial year 2017 -18, MoYAS has relaxed the  
following norms for conduct of Neighbourhood Youth Parliaments:  
 

 Organize Block Level Neighbourhood Youth Parliaments from the unspent funds 
towards Village Level Neighbourhood Youth Parliaments in current quarter i.e. 
between 15th May to 15 th June, 2017 in connection with International Day of Yoga in 
all District NYKs, which are having funds under this category.  
 Organize Village Level Neighbourhood Youth Parliaments  in connection with 
International Day of Yoga strictly as per Guidelines and laid down procedure. 
 Block level Neighbourhood Youth Parliament   - In case of Block level 
Neighbourhood Youth Parliament Programmes,  if the number of clubs in a block is 
less than 40 more than 02 youth can be taken from a club or Youth Club members from 
another adjoi ning blocks may be invited to achieve the stipulated minimum 
participation of 80 youth in a programme. 
 Neighbourhood Youth Parliaments may be organized on a cluster of 20 villages of a 
block at Block Level instead of village level .  In each of the Cluster of Villages level 
Parliament, 80 office bearers/ members @ 4 youth each, per village from 20 villages 
may be invited to participate. 
 Funds can be utilized for organizing Block Youth Parliaments, in case there are issues 
with Village level Programmes. Like last 2 years, such Programmes will need to be 
organised in current quarter in connection with International Day of Yoga. 
34. The Committee observes that the Ministry has relaxed certain norms for 
implementation of schemes for appropriate utilization  of  budget meant for the scheme 
under National Young Leaders Programme.  The Committee finds that the budget has been 
allocated at BE stage to the tune of Rs.20 crore, which is around Rs.6 crore more than the 
RE stage.  The Committee recommends that Block lev el programme as well as village level 
programmes may be conducted regularly and the fund given for it may be spent judiciously. 
NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS) 
35. National Service Scheme (NSS) was introduced in 1969 with the primary objective of 
developing the personality and character of the student youth through voluntary community 
service. ‘Education through Service’ is the purpose of the NSS. NSS aims at developing the 
following qualities/competencies among the volunteers : 
a) To understand the community in  which the NSS volunteers work and to understand 
themselves in relation to their community; 
b) To identify the needs and problems of the community and involve themselves in 
problem-solving exercise; 
c) To develop among themselves a sense of social and civic responsibility; 
d) To utilize their knowledge in finding practical solutions to individual and community 
problems; 
e) To gain skills in mobilizing community participation; 
f) To acquire leadership qualities and democratic values; 
g) To develop capacity to meet emergencies and natural disasters; and 

h) To practice national integration and social harmony. 
(i) The Department has taken a number of initiatives to enhance the effectiveness of 
implementation of NSS.  In fact, the Department had got an Evaluation Study of the NSS 
conducted through TISS (Tata Institute of Social Sciences). TISS gave a number of 
important recommendations on various aspects of the Programme, including (i) Planning, 
implementation, impact and sustainability of NSS activities, (ii) Training/ capacity building 
of NSS functionaries, (iii) Motivating NSS functionaries/ volunteers, and (iv) strategies for 
expansion of NSS. These recommendations were accepted and are being implemented. 
Some administrative measures being taken for close monitoring of the Programme an d for 
improving its effectiveness are as follows: 
 Timely release of grants/ funds to the States/ UTs for NSS activities.  
 Training/ Capacity Building of NSS Programme Officers through Empanelled 
Training Institutes (ETIs) for effective implementation of NSS programmes. 
 Close monitoring of the ongoing programmes/ activities of NSS through the 
network of NSS Regional Centres and State NSS Cells. 
 Regular Meetings of NSS Advisory Committees at various levels, for effective 
implementation of NSS programmes and for removing bottlenecks, if any. 
NSS has been very proactively involved in all flagship programmes of the Government. 
NSS volunteers have been actively involved in various programmes including Swatchh 
Bharat Mission, Digital India, Yoga Programmes, Sugamya  Bharat Abhiyan, 
BetiBachaoBetiPadhao, SaansadAdarsh Gram Yojana, etc. Further, to motive more and 
more students to opt for NSS, the NSS has now been made an Elective Subject (with 
credits). The UGC has issued necessary Advisory to all Universities in this  regard, on the 
request of Department of Youth Affairs.  
(ii) NSS has a well -designed administrative structure for effective implementation and close 
monitoring of the Programme – right from NSS units level to the National level.  Each NSS 
unit in an educa tional institution is led by a teacher designated as ‘Programme Officer 
(PO)’, who plays a pivotal role as an educator, organiser, coordinator, supervisor, 
administrator and public relations person for the NSS unit under him. At University Level, 
there is an NSS Cell and a designated Programme Coordinator (PC) to coordinate the NSS 
activities in respect of all NSS units in the University and its affiliated colleges. Similarly, 
in respect of Senior Secondary Schools, NSS Cell is located in the Dir ectorate of Senior 
Secondary Education. At State level , there is a State NSS Cell headed by a State NSS 
Officer (SNO), located in the State Government Department dealing with NSS.  At the 
National Level , there is a Directorate of NSS, which functions throu gh 15 Regional 
Directorates. In addition to the above, there are Advisory Committees at National, State, 
University and Institution level, comprising of official and non -official members, to 
provide necessary guidance to the NSS functionaries. Close monito ring of the Programme 

is ensure through the above set -up. There is t imely release of grants/ funds to the States/ 
UTs for NSS activities. Activities are monitored through elaborate monthly reporting 
system for physical/ financial achievements. There are no constraints as such in this regard. 
(iii) The administrative machinery is fully geared to expand coverage of programme to 
uncovered areas/ educational institutions. There is also demand from States/ UTs for 
allocation of additional funds for expanding cov erage of NSS in their respective States/ 
UTs. The Department has a vision to enhance the NSS coverage from current 36 lakh NSS 
volunteers to 100 lakh volunteers, but it has not been possible to work in that direction due 
to funds shortage. It the required funds are made available, the Department will be in a 
position to expand the coverage of NSS to uncovered areas.  
36. The Committee was informed that s o far (as on 31.12.17), 3,124 Self -financing Units 
(SFUs) of NSS have been set up in the country, with to tal volunteer strength of 3,12,208. The 
Scheme of SFUs was introduced in view of the fact that the demand for setting up of NSS units 
was very high and the Department was not in a position to provide funding for all such units due to 
funds constraints. At the same time, a number of Educational Institutions were prepared to fund 
and operate NSS units with their own resources. Such institutions were allowed to set up SFUs of 
NSS. The SFUs of NSS operate just like the regular NSS Units with the only difference  that the 
expenditure on running the units is borne by the concerned educational institution. Proactive 
efforts are being made to popularise SFUs in all parts of the Country, esp. those States/ UTs where 
such units are yet to be set up. Specific annual tar gets for setting up of SFUs are being fixed for 
each State/ UT. The State Governments have been requested to extend their full cooperation by 
issuing appropriate instructions/ persuading the educational institutions, esp. the institutions in 
private sector, to set up such units. The NSS officials from Regional Directorates get in touch with 
potential educational institutions and persuade them to set up such units. The operational 
guidelines for setting up of SFUs have been simplified to make it easier for w illing educational 
institutions to join NSS by setting up SFUs of NSS. The performance is being closely monitored to 
ensure that each State/ UT has SFUs of NSS and their number continues to increase year after 
year. 
 37. The Committee observes that the Min istry has been allocated Rs.160 crore for the 
National Service Scheme for BE -2018-19.  It is approximately Rs.16 crore more than the RE 
2017-18.  The Committee is constrained to note that only Rs.104.09 crore has been spent upto 
31st January, 2018.  The Co mmittee hopes that with the enhanced budget, the Ministry 

would increase the number of NSS volunteers.  The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should make vigorous  effort in helping the State Governments to set up more NSS 
units. The Committee feels that unless and until there is a close monitoring by the Ministry is 
done the efficacy of institutes cannot be achieved.  
RAJIV GANDHI  NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH  DEVELOPMENT (RGNIYD) 
38. Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development (RGNIYD), Sriperumbudur, Tamil 
Nadu, is an ‘Institute of National Importance’ under the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, 
Government of India, by virtue of enactment of RGNIYD Act, 2012. The RGNIYD was set up in 
1993 as a Society under the Societies Registration  Act, 1975.  RGNIYD functions as a vital 
resource centre with its multi-faceted functions of offering academic programmes at Post Graduate 
level encompassing various dimensions of youth development, engaging in seminal research in the 
vital areas of youth development and conducting Training/ Capacity Building Programmes in the 
area of youth development, besides the extension and outreach initiatives across the country. 
39. The Institute functions as a think -tank of the Ministry and premier organization of y outh-
related activities in the country. As the apex institute at the national level, it works in close 
cooperation with the NSS, NYKS and other youth organizations in the country. It has a wide 
network with various organizations working for the welfare and  development of young people and 
also serves as a mentor. The Vision of RGNIYD is to be a globally recognized and acclaimed 
centre of academic excellence in the field of youth development. 
Governance Structure of RGNIYD 
40. Hon’ble President of India is th e Visitor of the Institute. The multifarious activities of the 
Institute are monitored by the Executive Council, Academic Council, Finance Committee and the 
Building and Works Committee. 
41. The Director is the Chief Executive Officer who coordinates the d ay-to-day functioning of 
the Institute and implements the youth development programmes through various Divisions/ 
Centres/ Departments of the Institute. The total sanctioned staff strength of RGNIYD is 63 against 
which the actual strength was 46 as on 19.1 2.2017. The Institute also has a Regional Centre at 
Chandigarh, which is functional since 2013-14. 

Consequent upon RGNIYD being notified as an “Institute of National Importance”, the 
Government had approved a total outlay of Rs.514 crore for RGNIYD over 5 -years period from 
2014-15 to 2018 -19 for upgradation of the infrastructure and activities of the Institute. The total 
outlay of Rs.514 crore  comprises of Recurring Expenditure: Rs.172.40 crore, Non -recurring 
Expenditure: Rs.241.60 crore and creation of an  Endowment Corpus of Rs.100 crore. However, 
due to budgetary constraints, it has not been possible to make desired level of funds allocations to 
RGNIYD.  
42. The Committee was told that during the last 3 years, RGNIYD has been projecting its 
demand for fun ds allocation, consistent with the need to take up major upgradation of 
infrastructure, manpower and programming, pursuant to declaration of the Institute as “Institute of 
National Importance” vide RGNIYD Act, 2012. The position of demand and allocations d uring 
last 3 years (Plan plus Non-Plan) is as follows:- 
                                                                                                                  (Rs. in crores) 
Year Projected Demand for Funds Actual Allocation (Revised Estimates) 
2014-15 102.70 20.56 
2015-16 169.00 26.30 
2016-17 224.80 35.80 
2017-18 80.00 14.75* 
2018-19 23.00 23.00 
 *as on 31.01.2018 
Note: With effect from 2017-18, Plan and Non-Plan have been merged. 
43. The Committee observes that this is the first time that the Ministry has got the projected 
demand of Rs.23.00 crore as BE Rs.23 crore for 2018 -19.  The Committee is constrained to note 
that it could not get started the construction work by NPCC and thus unutilized money is lying idle 
and shocked to note that the advance of Rs.16 crore given to NPCC has not been adjusted so far.  
44. The Committee wants to know the hurdles which are stopping RGNIYD to appoint 
training programme officers and director in the I nstitute.  Many construction works of 
hostels blocks are going on with NPCC and other agencies under RGNIYD.  The Committee 

recommends that the undergoing projects should be monitored properly and the money 
involved in it may be taken care of for its judicious utilization.  
  

CHAPTER III 
 
I DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS AND ITS MAJOR INITIATIVES, POLICIES AND 
SCHEMES 
1.1 Sports and games have always been seen as an integral component in the all round 
development of human personality.  Sports also play a great role in generation of the spirit of 
healthy competition and bonding within the community.  Modern Sports being highly competitive, 
the use of modern infrastructure, equipment and advanced scientific support has changed the 
scenario of Sports at international le vel.  Keeping in view of the growing demands of advanced 
infrastructure equipment of and scientific support, several initiatives have been taken by the 
government to provide necessary assistance to sportspersons by way of training and exposure in 
international competition backed up with scientific and equipment support. 
1.2 The Secretary in his presentation before the Committee on 26 th February, 2018, gave an 
overview of the functioning and status of different activities undertaken by the Department of 
Sports. 
1.3 The Secretary submitted the Committee the Action Plan for 2018 -19.  He submitted that 
the campaign  Khelo India has been started with the motive of creating sporting culture throughout 
the country through mass participations and achieving  excellen ce in sports so as to emerge as a 
sporting nation over a period of time.   
1.4 He further added that in the medium and short term  the Department of Sports would 
include the following. 
(i) Broad basis of sports; 
(ii) Promoting Sporting culture in India; 
(iii) Promoting various sports in addition to cricket. 
(iv) Promoting indigenous/rural/tribal games; 
(v) Creating sports infrastructure at various levels; 
(vi) Up-gradation and development of infrastructure; 
(vii) Support to National Sports Federations and other sport bodies; 
(viii) Strengthening of scientific and coaching support to sports; 
(ix) Enhancement participation of women, scheduled tribes and level youth; 
(x) Involvement of corporate section in sports promotion; and 
(xi) special incentives to promote sports. 
 
1.5 He further pointed out that the achievement of excellence in Sports would be helped with 
the intervention of following institutions: 
(i) Sports Authority of India (SAI); 

(ii) National Anti-Doping Agency (NADA) and 
(iii) National Dope testing Laboratories (NDTL) 
 
II BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
  
2.1 In the presentation before the Committee, the Secretary gave a detailed explanation notes 
on Demands for Grants given to the Department of Sports. 
 
 
  
₹in crore 
  
Sl. 
No. Name of the Scheme BE 2017-
18 RE 2017-18 BE 2018-19 
% of Increase 
in BE 2018-19 
w.r.t. RE 
2017-18 
 
A Development in Sports institutions  
 
1 Sports Authority of India 481.00 495.73 429.56 -13.35%  
2 Laxmibai Institute of Physical 
Education 45.02 45.02 45.00 -0.04%  
3 National Dope Testing 
Laboratory 10.00 10.00 4.00 -60.00%  
4 National Anti-Doping Agency 4.00 4.15 10.00 140.96%  
5 World Anti-Doping Agency 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.00%  
6 
Indian Institute of Sports 
Science and Research 
(erstwhile National Institute of 
Sports Science and Sports 
Medicine) 
20.00 20.00 40.00 100.00% 
 
7 National Institute of Sports 
Coaching 5.00 10.00 30.00 200.00%  
8 Sports University in North  
East 50.00 30.00 65.00 116.67%  

  TOTAL (A) 616.02 615.90 624.56 1.41%  
B Encouragement and Awards to Sports Persons  
1 Special Cash Awards 10.00 14.13 11.00 -22.15%  
2 Arjuna, Dronacharya, 
Dhayanchand Awards 2.00 2.00 2.00 0.00%  
3 Pension to Meritorious Sports 
Person 2.00 2.00 10.00 400.00%  
4 Assistance to National Sports 
Federation 302.18 302.18 342.00 13.18%  
5 Human Resource Development in 
Sports 10.00 10.00 5.00 -50.00%  
6 National Sports Development 
Fund 2.00 2.00 2.00 0.00%  
7 Promotion of Sports among 
Disabled 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00%  
8 National Welfare Fund for Sports 
Persons 2.00 2.00 2.00 0.00%  
  TOTAL (B) 330.19 334.31 374.00 11.87%  
C Khelo India: National Programme for Development of Sports  
1 Khelo India 350.00 350.00 520.09 48.60%  
2 SAI Stadia Renevotion 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.00%  
3 
National Physical Fitness 
Programme Resource centre of 
LNUPE Gwalior 
5.00 2.00 0.00 -100.00% 
 
4 Scheme for Identification and 
Nurturing of Sports Talent 0.50 0.00 0.00 0.00%  
5 Enhancement of Sports Facility 
in J&K 75.00 75.00 50.00 -33.33%  

6 Himalayan Region Sports 
Festival 15.00 15.00 5.00 -66.67%  
7 Other Progarmme 1.00 0.50 1.00 100.00%  
  TOTAL (C)  447.00 443.00 576.59 30.16%  
  GRAND TOTAL (A+B+C) 1393.21 1393.21 1575.15 13.06%  
 
 
Non-Plan 
Year BE RE Actual Expenditure % of Expenditure  w.r.t. RE 
2015-16 76.65 82.00 79.90 97% 
2016-17 96.00 94.20 93.57 99% 
2017-18 139.21 1393.21 940.27 67.49% 
 
*as on 22.01.2018 
2.2    The Ministry has informed that there has been decrease in the allocation to SAI which was 
Rs. 481.00 Cr. at BE 2017 -18 and increased to Rs. 495.73 cr. at RE 2017 -18 and decrease to Rs. 
429.56 cr. at BE 2018 -19 (decrease percentage 13.34). The decrea se in BE 2018 -19 is due to the 
fact that some of the projects of SAI like setting up of SAI Training Centers and Academies, etc. 
are being funded from Khelo India Scheme. Beside this the schemes like Assistance to National 
Sports Federations, National Cent re for Sports Science and Research, National Centre for Sports 
Coaching and Enhancement of Sports Facility in J&K are being implemented by SAI and the 
budget provisions for all these schemes are being routed through SAI. 
PLAN 
Statement indicating the projected Demand, allocation, Expenditure, Percentage of utilization 
and under utilization for the year 2013 -14, 2014 -15, 2015 -16, 2016 -17, 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 
(Till 31st  Jan 2018) 
Sl.No. Year Projected 
Demand  
BE RE Expenditure GDP* % of total 
GDP 

1 2013-14   809.00 809.00 753.03 9817822.00 0.0082 
2 2014-15   1259.00 705.00 700.45 10522686.00 0.0067 
3 2015-16 1872.80 1005.48 942.46 941.20 11357529.00 0.0083 
4 2016-17 1839.43 900.00 984.15 981.54 12165481.00 0.0081 
5 2017-18 3287.96 1393.21 1393.21 987.58*     
6 2018-19 2193.05 1575.15         
*Expenditure till 31st Jan 2018 
NON-PLAN 
Statement indicating the projected Demand, allocation, Expenditure, Percentage of utilization 
and under utilization for the year 2013 -14, 2014 -15, 2015 -16, 2016 -17, 2017-18 and 2018 -19 
(Till 31st Jan 2018) 
Sl.No. Year Projected 
Demand  
BE RE Expenditure     
1 2013-14 88.33 65.00 57.59 56.93 9817822.00 0.0006 
2 2014-15 79.17 63.61 67.00 66.43 10522686.00 0.0006 
3 2015-16 745.32 76.65 82.00 79.90 11357529.00 0.0007 
4 2016-17 117.34 96.00 94.20 93.57 12165481.00 0.0008 
* The source of information is: http://statisticstimes.com/economy/gdp-of-india.php 
 
 
2.3 The Committee notes the Budget for the Department of Sports for the financial year 
2018-19.  There is an increase of Rs.181 crores, including the National Programmes of 
Department of Sports “Khelo India” from the last year.  As regards the allocations for 2018-
19, the Committee observes that against the projected budget estimate that of Rs. 2193.05 
crore,  the Department has got only Rs.1575.15 crore  i.e. a defecit of Rs.617.90 crore.  The 
Committee wonders how the Department of Sports is going to cope up with such a huge gap 
between the projected demand and the allocated amount.  As the three  major events of 
international games viz., Commonwealth Games -2018, Asian games -2019 and Olympic 
Games -2020 are scheduled within  two years time, the Committee  appr ehends, how the 
Department  is going to complete its target of training sportspersons to compete at 
international level.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take 

up the matter of budget deficit at RE stage with the Ministry of Finance, so that the 
preparation for mega events should not suffer due to shortage of money.   
 
III SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAI) 
3.1  Sports Authority of India (SAI) was set up as a Society registered under the Societies 
Registration Act 1860 in pursuance of the Resolution No. 1-1/83/SAI dated 25th January, 1984 to carry 
forward the legacy of the IX th Asian Games held in New Delhi in 1982, under the Ministry of 
Youth Affairs and Sports (MYAS). SAI has been entrusted with twin objectives of promoting 
sports and achieving sporting excellence at the National and International level. Subsequently, in 
order to facilitate development of SAI as a robust sports promotion body, necessary knowledge 
and skills in the field of sports coaching and physical education w ere incorporated by 
amalgamating the erstwhile Society for National Institutes of Physical Education & Sports 
(SNIPES) consisting of Netaji Subhash National Institute for Sports (NSNIS), Patiala and its 
Centres along with two other educational institutes, namely, Lakshmibai National College of 
Physical Education (LNCPE) located at Gwalior and Thiruvananthapuram, with SAI w.e.f. 1 st 
May, 1987. The LNCPE, Gwalior was, however, delinked from SAI in September, 1995 on 
attaining the status of a “Deemed Universit y”. Today, SAI stands out as an apex body for 
promotion of sports and sports excellence in the country. 
The Aims & Objectives of SAI are given below: 
• To promote and broad-base sports in the country; 
• To identify/ scout sports talent and nurture it;  
• To implement schemes/ programmes for achieving excellence in sports in different 
disciplines at international level in order to establish India as a major sporting power; 
• To manage the Stadia in Delhi, which were constructed /renovated for the IX th Asian 
Games held in 1982;  
• To act as an interface between the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports and respective 
State Governments, as well as other agencies responsible for promotion/development of 
sports in the country; 
• To establish, run, manage and administer institutions to produce high caliber coaches, 
sports scientists and physical education teachers; 
• To plan, construct, acquire, develop, manage, maintain and utilize sports infrastructure 
and facilities in the country; 
• To initiate, undertake, sponsor, stimulate and encourage research projects related to 
various sports sciences for upgradation of sports, sportspersons and coaches; and 

• To initiate issues and/ or cooperate with other Central or State bodies and other 
institutions involved in spo rts promotion and development of sports excellence in the 
country. 
 
3.2   The major objective of SAI is broad basing of sports by identifying talented sports persons 
(boys and girls) in various sports discipline and to nurture them to excel at National and  
International level competition. To meet the objective SAI is implementing the following Sports 
Promotional schemes in the country. 
1. National Sports Talent Contest (NSTC) 
2. Army Boys Sports Company (ABSC) 
3. SAI Training Center (STC) 
4. Special Area Games (SAG) 
5. Extension Centres of STC/SAG 
6. Centre of Excellence (COE) 
7. SAI National Sports Academies 
Accordingly, SAI has established 10 Regional Centres and 02 educational institutions to 
implement the above sports promotional schemes in the country. Presently, under SAI Sports 
Promotional Schemes 14,505 talented sportspersons 10195 boys and 4310 girls are provided with 
regular sports training in 27 sports disciplines on residential and non -residential basis in 303 SAI 
Sports Centres.  
3.3  Main constraints before the Inst itute is the shortage of funds for the development of 
projects, activities and maintenance of existing infrastructure.  The Budget of the Institute has been 
decreased to Rs.30.00 crore for 2017 -18 from Rs.45 crore (approx.) in 2016 -17. Under the Major 
Head 2004 against which only Rs.11.02 crore have been provided in this Institute for entire 
activities of the Institute except salary.  Whereas maintenance, repair, various administrative 
expenses etc. of the Institute require more than Rs.15 crore in a year.  The Institute has also earlier 
requested MYAS to enhance the budget to cope up the requirement of the development of projects, 
activities and maintenance of existing Infrastructure.  Thus, there is apparently shortage of funds 
and the Institute once again  requested the Ministry to provide additional funds for infrastructural 
activities. Similarly, for NERC Guwahati during the year 2016 -17 an amount of Rs.16.35 crore 
was released whereas only Rs.15 crore were sanctioned for 2017 -18.  It is for information t hat 
construction work of amount of Rs.42 crore (approx.) is already in progress and for which 
additional funds are required. 
 

3.4 The Committee expresses its concern over the pruning of budget for Sports Authority 
of India (SAI) for the financial year 2018 -19.  At RE 2017 -18, it was Rs. 495.73 crore  which 
has been further decreased to Rs.429.56 crore against a projected demand of Rs .621 crore.  
The Committee is aware of the role of SAI for the Development of Sports in the country.  
The Committee feels that it may be difficult for the authority to run its programme and 
maintain the existing infrastructure.  Hence, the Committee recomm ends that the 
Department of Sports should make concerted efforts for more budget to be allocated to SAI 
at RE stage for its various development works going on in different parts of the country. 
 
  

3.5 To implement Sports Promotional Schemes SAI establish its unit centres under its various 
schemes across the country. The scheme wise number of SAI Sports Centres (Sub Centres) 
presently operational across the country are as under: 
 
S.No Name of the Scheme Number of Centres 
1. National Sports Talent Contest (NSTC) Scheme 
a) Adopted Regular School  
b) IGMA Schools  
c) Adopted Akharas  
d) Army Boys Sports Company (ABSC) Scheme   
 
11 
10 
44 
27 
2. SAI Training Centre (STC) Scheme 59 
3. Special Area Games (SAG) Scheme 20 
4. Extension Centre of STC/SAG Scheme 102 
5. Centre of Excellence (COE) Scheme   15 
6. National Sports Academy (NSA) Scheme 15 
 
3.6  Under the above Sports Promotional Schemes SAI has established 290 Sports Centres  in 
the country and regular training on Residential & Non -Residential basis is imparted to 13684 
talented sports persons of which 9653 are Boys and 4031 Girls. To expand the implementation of 
the existing scheme more number of SAI Centres are required to b e established specially to cater 
to the needs of the youth belonging to tribal, rural, backward, hilly and coastal areas of the 
country. SAI Regional Centres/ Sub -Centres and Academic Institutions are the implementing 
agencies for its Sports Promotional Sc hemes and academic programmes across the country.  
 
3.7 The Committee feels that there is a need of enhancing  the role of SAI in trapping 
talents from tribal, rural and backward areas of the country.  The Committee is of the view 
that it may not be feasibl e to achieve the goal of identifying the Sports talent and train them 
for major events by SAI alone. The Committee suggests that the Department of Sports 
should explore the possibilities of roping in the relevant agencies like, the State Governments 
and it s bodies, Public Sector Undertakings, the Corporate Sector etc. extending the SAI’s 
outreach to those areas. 
 

IV LAKSHMIBAI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION (LNIPE) 
AND LAKSHMIBAI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR PHYSICAL EDUCATION 
(LNCPE) 
4.1 Lakshmibai National College of Physical Education, Kariavattom, Thiruvananthapuram 
came into existence on 17 th August, 1985 under the auspices of the Department of Youth Affairs 
and Sports, Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India.  With the 
amalgamation of SNIPES with Sports Authority of India on 1 st May, 1987, the College became a 
part of the academic wing of the Sports Authority of India on par with Netaji Subhas National 
Institute of Sports, Patiala and Lakshmibai National College of Physical E ducation, Gwalior. It 
was established in 50 acres of land taken over from University of Kerala, Karyavattom campus on 
the northern side of NH-47, 1 Km away from Karyavattom Jn., Thiruvananthapuram. 
The objectives and functions are:- 
(a) To prepare highly compe tent and skilled leaders, teachers, coaches, scholars and 
administrators in the field of physical education, sports and games as well as associated 
areas. 
(b) To serve as a Centre of Excellence for research in physical education and allied areas. 
(c) To provide technical, professional and academic leadership to other institutions of physical 
education elsewhere in India and abroad. 
(d) To provide vocational guidance and placement services to people in the field  
(e) To develop and promote programmes of mass physical education activity. 
(f) To provide infrastructure, board and lodging facilities for State and National level Coaching 
Camps as well as make this College a hub of ongoing schemes of SAI. 
(g) To provide training facilities for various SAI Sports Promotional Schemes. 
 
Affiliated to the University of Kerala, the College offers the following courses:  
(i) Bachelor of Physical Education (4 years)    
(ii) Master of Physical Education (2 years)    
(iii) M.Phil          
(iv) Regular Ph.D       
(v) Part-time Ph.D  
(vi) NIS Diploma in Sports Coaching (Water sports)  
 
The institution also conducts the following programmes: 
(a) Six week Certificate Course in Sports Coaching 
(b) Coaching Camps for State/National Training Teams 
(c) Refresher Courses for in-service teachers. 
(d) Pay and play scheme   

(e) Come and Play scheme 
(f) Health & Fitness programme for general public on payment 
 
The Students’ strength is  given below: 
Sl.No Class Girls Boys Total 
1 BPEd V 17 27 44 
2 BPEd VII 17 23 40 
3 MPE previous 8 16 24 
4 MPE lI 1 13 14 
  43 79 122 
5 NIS Diploma 03 09 12 
6 M.Phil            NIL 
 Total 46 88 134 
 
LAKSHMIBAI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION, GWALIOR 
 
4.2    The Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education was established initially as a 
College on 17 th August in 1957 i.e. the centenary year of the war for India’s Independence. The 
Institute is located at Gwalior, where Rani Lakshmibai of Jhansi had laid her life for the country’s 
freedom struggle. In recognition of the services rendered by the Institute  in the field of physical 
education and sports, Deemed to be University status has been conferred upon it by the 
Government of India on recommendations of University Grants Commission under Section 3 of 
the UGC Act, 1956 in the year 1995. The Institute is an autonomous organization under 
administrative control of Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, Government of India and it is run 
through the Society registered under the Madhya Pradesh Societies Registration Act, 1973.The 
objectives of the Institute are as under:- 
(i) To prepare highly qualified teachers and leaders in the field of Physical 
Education and Sports. 
(ii) To serve as a Centre of Excellence and Innovation in Physical Education and to 
undertake, promote and disseminate research in this field. 

(iii) To provide professional and academic leadership to other institutes in the field of 
Physical Education, 
(iv) To provide vocational guidance and placement services to the professionals in 
this field. 
(v) To promote mass-participation in Physical Education and Sports. 
(vi) To develop and promote programmes of Physical Education and Sports in the 
country. 
(vii) To encourage and produce scientific contemporary literature in the field of 
Physical Education and Sports. 
(viii) To provide community services in the field of Physical Education and Sports. 
 
4.3 The Institute has the following seven academic Departments: 
a) Department of Sports Biomechanics 
b) Department of Exercise Physiology 
c) Department of Health Education  
d) Department of Sports Psychology 
e) Department of Physical Education Pedagogy  
f) Department of Sports Management & Coaching  
g) Department of Yogic Sciences  
 
The Committee was apprised that the main constraint before the Institute is the shortage of funds 
for the development of projects, activities and maintenance of existing infrastructure.  Th e Budget 
of the Institute has been decreased to Rs.30.00 crore for 2017 -18 from Rs.45 crore (approx.) in 
2016-17.  Under the Major Head 2004 against which only Rs.11.02 crore have been provided in 
this Institute for entire activities of the Institute excep t salary.  Whereas maintenance, repair, 
various administrative expenses etc. of the Institute require more than Rs.15 crore in a year.  The 
Institute has also earlier requested MYAS to enhance the budget to cope up the requirement of the 
development of pro jects, activities and maintenance of existing Infrastructure.  Thus, there is 
apparently shortage of funds and the Institute once again requested the Ministry to provide 
additional funds for infrastructural activities.  This institute has also shortage  of  teaching and non-
teaching  staff. 
 
4.4 The Committee is constrained to note that the Budget Estimate 2018 -19 for 
Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior has been kept at Rs. 45 crores 
against  a projected Demand of Rs.65 crores for th e financial year  2018-19.  The Committee 
is aware about the role of LNIPE, Gwalior in promoting the progammes of Physical 

Education and Sports in the country.  The Committee suggests that  efforts  may be made by 
the Ministry to help the Institute in impr oving the skills  of aspirants who wants to excel in 
the field of Sports at National and international level. 
The Committee expresses its concern over shortage  of teaching and non teaching 
staff at LNIPE, Gwalior and North Eastern Regional Centre, Guwahati and recommends 
that the appointment of required number of staff may be made at the earliest to these 
institutes. 
V NATIONAL ANTI-DOPING AGENCY (NADA) 
5.1 The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports is committed to take stringent measures in 
conjunction with sports stakeholders to rid sports of the menace of doping and create a clean and 
healthy environment for sports in India. The National Anti -Doping Agency (NADA) which has 
been established as an autonomous body by the Ministry is taking concrete steps  to discourage and 
prevent Indian athletes and sports persons from using illegal and artificial performance enhancing 
drugs and to promote healthy lifestyle among athletes by way of collecting in and out of 
competition samples. The main objectives of NADA anti-doping rules and program are to preserve 
the integrity of sports in India. In this endeavor, NADA has conducted 33,768 dope tests on 
athletes during the past 9 years, with details as under: 
 
 
S. No 
 
 Year 
Sample Collection  
Total Anti-Doping Rule Violation(ADRV)  Urine Blood 
1 2009 2331 0 2331 67 
2 2010 2772 22 2794 123 
3 2011 3156 50 3206 116 
4 2012 3989 334 4323 119 
5 2013 4230 190 4420 98 
6 2014 4135 303 4438 94 
7 2015 4862 433 5295 120 
8 2016  3196 167 3363 73 
9 2017 3312 286 3598 
69 

                                                              
Total 
33,768 
881 
 
5.2 The Ministry has informed  through  the reply of a questionnaire that  a total no. of 881 
Anti-Doping Rule violations has been reported out of 33,768 Dope tests conducted by NADA in 
last 9 years. Among the dope positives, the sports disciplines like athletics, weightlifting, 
wrestling, powe r lifting, kabaddi, boxing etc. constitutes significant number of cases. Necessary 
disciplinary action has been taken against the guilty sportspersons under the ADR of NADA.To 
further increase the awareness -cum-outreach level of this anti -doping campaign, NADA has 
launched Mass Athlete Awareness Program Against Doping. Under this program, NADA is 
conducting numerous workshops, educational and awareness programs about the prohibited 
drugs/substances and methods in sports across the country for sports persons , young athletes, 
coaches and supporting staff. During the year 2017, NADA has conducted 64 such awareness 
programs and workshops at various places all over India.              
 
5.3 The Committee observes that the budget for National Dope Testing Laborator y, 
National Anti -Doping Agency has been allocated as per projected budget estimate.  The 
Committee is concerned over the number of cases found as positive is not coming down over 
the years.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry  should runAwareness P rogram 
against Doping more vigorously to wipe out this menace completely. 
 
VI NATIONAL DOPE TESTING LABORATORY (NDTL) 
6.1 The National Dope Testing Laboratory (NDTL) an autonomous body under the Ministry of 
Youth Affairs and Sports is the only WADA accredited laboratory in country. The NDTL is 
responsible for analytical testing of samples as per WADA prescribed guidelines. It  is also 
accredited by the National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) 
for ISO/IEC 17025. NDTL has the state of art facilities with adequacy for research and testing as 
per WADA guidelines. All the samples collected by NADA  in past years as well as samples 
collected in current year is being sent to NDTL for dope testing purpose.   
 
6.2 The Committee observes that NDTL is performing its duties well and the Committee 
hopes that the NDTL will keep on maintaining its standard an d impartiality on Dope Test as 
per international norm. 

 
VII NATIONAL SPORTS UNIVERSITY (NSU) 
7.1 National Sports University Society  aims  to be a leading University in preparing  world 
Class athletes, sports scientists, Physical educationists and using our own  original creative 
educational system and research to realize forthcoming knowledge based society and promote 
local sports development. 
7.2 The proposal for setting up of National Sports University in Manipur was formally 
announced by the Hon’ble Finance Minister in his Budget Speech (2014 -15) on 10 July 2014. 
NITI Ayog has conveyed in - principle approval for the project. This new Cent ral Sector Scheme 
would be implemented in five years.  Tentative cost of the  project will be  more than  Rs.500 
crores. The training programe of the proposed Sports University would be organized under Four 
Schools: School of Sports Science and Sports Medi cine, School of Sports Management and 
Technology, School of Sports Education and School of Interdisciplinary Studies.  The Four 
Schools would have Thirteen Departments under them.The Government of Manipur has provided 
the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Spor ts with land measuring 325.90 acres in West Imphal 
District of Manipur, for the proposed University on 29.12.2016. Hindustan Steelworks 
Construction Limited (HSCL) has been engaged as  the Project Management Consultant for setting 
up the proposed University. 
7.3 To ensure that the proposed University conforms to the best international standards and 
practices, Memorandums of Understanding (MOUs) with the Universities of Canberra and 
Victoria have been signed by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports in Apr il 2017. Pending 
finalization of NSU Bill, National Sports University Society has been established under the 
Manipur Societies Registration Act, 1989.  For academic session 2017-18, BPES and B.Sc. (Sports 
Coaching) courses will start from the temporary cam pus at Khuman Lampak Sports Complex 
which will be the Head Quarters of the National Sports University Society.  While making his 
presentation before the Committee on the Demands for Grants 2018 -19, the Secretary, Department 
of Sports informed that two cour ses have been started and two more are likely to commence  from 
July, 2018.  The Secretary further  informed that the construction work is going on fast pace and 
assured that the University will be fully functional on expected line.  The NSU has got Rs. 65  
crore for financial year 2018 -19 against the RE 2017 -18 Rs.30 crore which shows a hike of 116% 
for the current financial year. 

7.4 The Committee is happy to note the facts that a National Sports University is coming 
up in the State of Manipur.  The Commit tee feels that the construction of the University 
should be completed on priority  so that it could start functioning soon in full fledged 
manner. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would ensure that requisite funds are made 
available so that this project is completed without any interruption.  
VIII  NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATION (NSF) 
 
8.1 The Ministry  informed the committee that the National Sports Federation (NSF) has been 
allocated Rs. 342.00 crore.  There is an increase of Rs.40 crore in the budget over BE & RE for the 
financial year 2017 -18.  National Sports Federations (NSFs) are responsible and accountable for 
the overall management, direction, control regulation, promotion and development of various 
disciplines of sports in the country. 
8.2 All the  issues relating to training, preparations for International competitions including 
fund allocations under various heads and performance of Indian sportspersons/teams is being 
discussed in detail with the National Sports Federations (NSF’s) and experts fro m the respective 
fields in the beginning of the year, while finalising the Annual Calendar for Training & 
Competitions (ACTC’s) with periodic review of progress by the Secretary (Sports) / Director 
General, SAI.  In addition, a Steering Group has been cons tituted under Mission Olympic Cell 
(MOC) having members from National Sports Federations, Indian Olympic Association, Ex -
eminent players, reputed Coaches besides Officials from Sports Ministry and SAI.  The Steering 
Group monitors the various activities re lating to preparations of Indian teams including NSF’s and 
gives its recommendations for improvement wherever required. 
8.3 Under scheme of assistance to National Sports Federation, the Government of India 
provides assistance to National Sports Federations  (NSFs) and other sports organizations for 
conducting National championships and holding of International Tournaments in India, 
participation in international tournaments abroad, organizing coaching camps, procuring sports 
equipment, and engagement of fore ign coaches. In 2015, with a view to giving a boost to the 
preparation of Indian athletes and enhancing the medal hopes of the country, the Ministry of Youth 
Affairs and Sports made upward revision of various financial parameters under the Scheme of 
Assistance to National Sports Federations. For international events held in India, the quantum of 
financial assistance has been enhanced from Rs.10 lakhs to Rs.30 lakhs per tournament. The 

amount for holding National Championships has been revised from Rs.2 lakh s for seniors, juniors 
and sub-juniors to Rs.5 lakhs for seniors, Rs.7 lakhs for juniors and Rs. 10 lakhs for sub -juniors. 
Medical insurance policy of Rs.5 lakhs and Personal Accident Policy of Rs.25 lakhs for athletes 
has been allowed. NSFs have been allo wed to procure equipment up to Rs. 10 -Lakh.To promote 
indigenous/ regional sports events, a new provision of assistance of up to Rs. 5 lakh each for such 
events has been made. Assistance of Rs. 25 lakh will be available for holding traditional 
tournaments in India. This will help improve the quality of tournaments. Financial assistance to 
sports disciplines in 'others' category has been restored. 
 
8.4 Some of the Core Principles enunciated for Good governance include: - 
    Elections of Sports body should be governed by clear, fair rules which includes clear 
electoral role none to the public advance, appointment of independent returning officer, voting 
by secret ballot etc. 
   Adequate procedural regulations must exist to ensure there is no conflicts of interests.  
   The terms of office should be of limited duration, in order to allow renewal of office bearers 
on  a regular basis; and give access to new candidates. 
Cooperation, coordination and consultation with Govt. to preserve autonomy. 
 
8.5 Govt. has issued guidelines from time to time on good governance to bring in transparency 
and accountability in the functioning of the various National Sports Federations. The NSF are 
required to comply with the provisions of the National Sports Developmen t Code of India2011 
for getting annual recognition and various concessions from the Govt. viz. adhere to age and 
tenure limits of the office bearers, adopt proper accounting procedures at all levels and produce 
annual financial statements, adopt impartial and transparent selection procedures, follow proper 
democratic elections, take measures against age fraud in sports, comply with the provision of the 
RTI Act, holding regular national championships, ensure DOPE tests of all its players regularly 
as per nor ms/standards, suo -moto disclosure of information in the website of National Sports 
Federations etc. 
  8.6 It is mandatory for all the NSFs to submit their annual audited accounts to the Registrar of 
Societies as per the Societies Registration Act.  The Gov ernment has already put in place a system 
to ensure accountability by the NSFs, whereby all the NSFs are financially accountable to the 
Government and are required to submit Utilization Certificates for the grants received from the 


Government.  Fresh assis tance is not sanctioned to such NSFs which are in default with regard to 
submission of Utilization Certificate.  To enhance accountability, the Federations receiving a grant 
of more than Rs.1.00 crore from the Government are required to get their accounts audited by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  CAG seeks the sanction of the President under Section 
14(2) of the CAG Act for carrying out the audit of the NSFs. During the last three years, sanction 
of the President was conveyed to CAG for carr ying out the audit of Badminton Association of 
India, Hockey India, All India Tennis Association, National Rifle Association of India, Special 
Olympic Bharat, Table Tennis Federation of India, Association of Indian Universities, Judo 
Federation of India and Indian Kayaking & Canoeing Association.  
 
8.7  The Comptroller and Auditor General of India sends its observation/ objection to the NSFs, 
which have been audited by them, directly for removing the deficiencies pointed out in its report 
and  furnish a com pliance report directly to the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. The 
Government also takes suitable steps as may be necessary, for compliance of the directions and 
observations of Comptroller and Auditor General, wherever the NSFs fail to comply th e direction 
of CAG. The annual recognition of some NSFs, which have not held their election on time, are 
withheld. In the past the annual recognition of Netball Federation of India, Cycle Polo Federation 
of India were withheld for not holding the elections  after it has become due. Also, Archery 
Association of India was derecognized for not following the age & tenure guidelines of Sports 
Code in its election held in 2012. 
8.8 The Committee feels that  National Sports Federation (NSF) is a bridge between the 
sportspersons and the Ministry. The Federation have got very important functions  relating 
to promotion and development of various sports at national and international level. The 
Committee finds that the amount allocated  for assistance to various  federat ions to the tune 
of Rs. 342 crore would be sufficient.  However, the Committee feels that spending this money 
in prudent manner is more important and hope that the federations will set examples for 
others to follow. 
8.9 The Committee also observes that eve rything is not in line as far as the functioning of 
Federations is concerned.  Regular elections are not held for various posts and rules are not 
followed as per the instructions laid down for the federations.  The Committee is concerned 
over the matter if  the federations are not functioning properly, it will cause immense loss to 

related  sportspersons and ultimately the sports.  The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should  ensure that the Federations hold elections to choose their representatives, 
office bearers on regular interval and function properly.  The Ministry should monitor the 
functioning of the Federations in the interest of promoting sports. 
IX NATIONAL CENTRE FOR SPORTS SCIENCES AND RESEARCH (NCSSR)  
9.1 The scheme aims to support high l evel research, education and innovation with respect to 
high performance of elite athletes. With a view to pursuing this objective, the scheme is focused 
on sports science including sports sciences and sports medicine through creation of/ support to the 
following institutional mechanism: 
i. National Centre of Sports Science and Research (NCSSR) to be established in the National 
Institute of Sports, Patiala (an existing institution of sports coaching, education, sports 
sciences, sports medicine and athlete training under the Sports Authority of India 
ii. Support to Sports Sciences Department in select Universities. 
iii. Support to Sports Medicine Department in select Institutes/ Medical Colleges. 
 
9.2      The total cost of the proposed scheme would be Rs.107crore for NCSSR and Rs. 237 crore 
for support to Sports Sciences and Sports Medicine Departments in select Universities and 
Medical Colleges. Its duration would be from 2017 -18 to 2019 -20. It wo uld be a central sector 
scheme.  
9.3 The Committee observes that the budget of Rs.40 crores for 2018 -19 provided for 
NISSR appears to be adequate  and  hopes  that the additional budget may be provided by 
the Ministry as and when it is required by the Insti tute.  The Committee is of the view that 
since the area of the sports science and sports medicine  have gained importance  in the 
recent times, it is a welcome step in right direction to establish such a Research Centre in 
Sports  Science and Sports medici ne within a stipulated time frame and  desires to be 
apprised of the progress of the developments in the matter time to time. 
9.4     Rs. 3.0525 crore has been released for procurement of equipment for NCSSR. It involves 
equipment for Anthropometry, Nutrition, Physiology, Psychology, Bio-chemistry, GTMT and Bio-
mechanics    Expression of Interest (EOI) was called for funding of eligible Universities and 
Institutes/Medical Colleges/ Hospitals. Two Universities viz. Guru Nanak Dev University, 
Amritsar; Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior; and National Institute of 

Nutrition, Hyderabad have been selected for setting up/augmenting Sports Sciences Departments 
therein and Vardhman Mahavir Medical College & Safdarjung Hospital and King Geor ge’s 
Medical University, Lucknow have been selected for augmenting Sports Medicine Departments 
therein. Approx. Rs. 5.8 crore has been released to aforementioned Institutions for procurement of 
equipment. 
9.5 The Committee feels that the Selection of Insti tutes for setting up Sports Sciences 
Development is also important and such places may be given priority from where large  
number of Sports persons/talents come to play various games.   The Committee thinks that 
many Sports talents are coming from North Ea stern Region.  Hence, the Committee 
recommends that the medical college or institutes may be selected, anywhere but accessible 
place in North Eastern Region to establish a Sports Science Development Institute there. The 
Committee feels that it will be of g reat help for budding talents in the region, who would 
perform in various games with more vigour and enthusiasm. 
X NETAJI SUBHASH INSTITUTE OF SPORTS SCIENCE, PATIALA 
10.1   The National Institute of Sports was inaugurated on 7 th May, 1961 to herald an era  of 
systematic and scientific sports coaching, in the country.  In the year 1973, the institute was 
dedicated to the memory of Netaji Subhas Chander Bose. After the merger of the SAI & SNIPES, 
in 1987, the Institute became the Academic Wing of the Sports A uthority of India. The Major 
Functions  are:- 
1. Teaching 
a) Organization of sports education programmes for training of sports professionals e.g. 
coaches, doctors, scientists, for various sports related functions. 
b) Organization of  refresher courses, seminars, conferences & workshops, etc. for up-dating 
and up -grading the knowledge of the  scientists, coaches, sports officials, and 
sportspersons 
c) Coordination and organization of the IOC Solidarity Courses for the benefit of sports 
coaches & scientists. 
d) A source of information and counseling through experts and publication of sports 
literature. 
 
(ii)Research 
e) Conducting and promoting research in sports and sports sciences. 
f) Dissemination of sports information. 
g) Publication of research quarterly, the  Journal of Sports & Sports Sciences 

 
Coaching 
(i)     Sports  training 
h) Provision of material and logistic and scientific support for the organization of the 
national coaching camps, for training of elite sportspersons, for international 
competitions, under National Coaching Scheme. 
 Management of the SAI Training Centre and SAI Centre of Excellence, for training of 
sportspersons, under the sports promotion schemes of the SAI. 
 Pay & Play facility to sportspersons, wherever possible. 
(ii)     Scientific Support 
(i) Provision of scien tific support to the elite sportspersons attending the national coaching 
camps, and to the trainees of the SAI sports promotion schemes, by monitoring their 
physiological and psychological status, through scientific tests, and through counseling 
 
 
The Faculty of Sports Sciences was set up in 1983,  and the  Institute has the following 
departments, equipped with proper laboratories: 
 
1. Sports Physiology  5.  Sports Anthropometry 
2. Sports Psychology  6.  Sports Medicine 
3. Sports Biomechanics             7. General Theory &Methods of Training 
4. Sports Biochemistry 
 
10.2   The Faculty is recognized as a scientific -research institution by the department of Sciences 
and Technology; and is authorized by the MCI for conducting P.G. Diploma in Sport s Medicine. 
The main functions of the Faculty are as follows: 
 Teaching the students of the Sports Coaching education programmes 
and teaching & management of the two-year Postgraduate Diploma in 
Sports Medicine. 
 Provision of scientific support to the National Coaching Camps and 
Centres of the Sports promotion schemes of SAI. 
 Management of Research Fellowship Scheme of SAI 
 Promotion of Scientific research in Sports & Sports Sciences 
 Publication of a quarterly research Journal : The Sports Research 
 
10.3 The Committee observes that Netaji Subhash Institute of Sports Science, Patiala is 
playing very important role in training the sports professionals, conducting research in 
sports and sports sciences, providing coachi ng to sportspersons in various disciplines and 

giving scientific support to elite sportspersons. The Committee feels that in modern times for 
promotion and excellence of sports at international level, the country needs institute like 
NSISS, Patiala to run with the time.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry while 
giving financial support to this institute also make endeavour to establish such institute in 
other parts of the country.  
 
TRAINING OF ELITE ATHLETES AND MANAGEMENT SUPPORT (TEAMS) 
 
10.4 From its outset, the Institute has been engaged in the training of sports probable’s, of 
various sports disciplines. To meet this goal, the academic programmes of the Institute have 
contributed a lot by way of provision of high calibre coaches. 
10.5 After the merger with the SAI, the training of the national probables is being handled by 
the TEAMS Wing, of the SAI. The Institute manages the conduct of various national coaching 
camps, allotted to the institute, by the SAI TEAMS Wing from time to time. The pi tch and the 
volume of this work increases & decreases as per the schedule of various international sports 
competitions. This work is being handled exclusively by a department, the Coaching Camp Cell of 
the Institute, under the supervision of an Officer on Special Duty. The Institute provides sports 
infrastructure, boarding & lodging, and all types of logistic support, for the successful organization 
of the camps, and the selection of the national teams. 
 
10.6 TEAMS (Training of Elite Athletes & Management S upport) Division is entrusted with the 
responsibility of preparing the National teams in the difference disciplines for various National & 
International Sports events in coordination with the National Sports Federations concerned, on 
behalf of the Ministry of YA & Sports. In other words, it provides necessary facilities to elite sport 
person preparing for International Sports events like Olympics, Asian Games, Commonwealth 
Games and World Cup and other International Competitions in India and Abroad.  It imp lements 
the plans prepared by various National Sports Federations vide their Annual Calendar for Training 
and Competition (ACTC) and approved by the Committee for preparation of National Teams for 
National and International Tournaments by providing the following facilities:  
 
COACHING CAMP    
Coaching Camps in 12 disciplines were held under the Scheme for “Financial Assistance to 
National Sports federations”.  

 
INTERNATIONAL COMPETITIONS  
The Indian teams took part in various International competitions in all major sports disciplines.  
 
FOREIGN COACHES 
Total 28 Foreign Coaches in 09 disciplines and 09 foreign support staff in Athletics & Hockey 
discipline were engaged for the training of Indian Sportspersons.  
 
SPORTS SCIENCE BACK – UP  
It provided scientifi c back -up in the form of doctors in Sports Medicine, Scientists, 
Physiotherapists and Masseurs etc. to the Sportspersons during National Coaching Camps for 
enhancing their fitness, recovery from injury and recovery from medical deficiency.  
 
EQUIPMENT SUPPORT 
It provided necessary equipment support both imported as well as indigenous, to the National 
campers.  
 
10.7 The Committee observes that TEAMS wing of SAI is handling the training 
programmes of national probables  in  various sports disciplines. The Committee desires that 
it intensively focuses on the designing the training programmes specifically for those 
games/events in which medal prospects are very high at forthcoming international events.  
XI NATIONAL COACHING SCHEME 
11.1 The National Coaching Scheme which is modified version of Rajkumari Amrit Kaur 
Scheme caters to the objective of broad -basing sports throughout the country and provides 
scientific training to achieve excellence in sports. Under the Scheme, the co aches are provided to 
the State Government/UT administration/UFS for State Coaching Centre. However due to shortage 
of coaches no SAI coach was posted outside SAI schemes during the year under report to 
strengthen its own Sports Promotional Schemes.  The c oaches are also utilized to impart training 
to young sports persons under different operational schemes of SAI. In addition to this, the 
coaches are also involved in the training of national teams and assisting the Academic Wing in 
conducting Diploma/Masters Courses in coaching in different sports disciplines. SAI coaches also 
assist the National Sports Federations in conducting National coaching camps in preparation for 
International competitions. 
 
11.2 The SAI Coaches are involved in the talent scouting p rocess through which talented sports 
persons are spotted and inducted into various SAI sports promotional schemes i.e. National Sports 

Talent Contest(NSTC), Special Area Games (SAG), Army Boys Sports Company (ABSC) and 
SAI Training Centres(STC). Coaches have also been deployed at various Regional Centres of SAI 
to monitor the progress of training and performance of coaches working in the field.  Coaches are 
also being posted for Come & Play Scheme and Community connect Schemes of SAI at SAI Head 
Office and Regional Headquarters. The major activities carried out during the year under the 
report are as under:- 
 
(1) Recruitment of Regular Asstt. Coaches 
162 Coaches joined SAI in the grade of Asstt. Coach in November, 2017 in 16 different 
disciplines i.e. Archery, Athletic, Boxing, Badminton, Football, Gymnastics, Hockey, Judo, 
Shooting, Swimming Wrestling, Weightlifting, Volleyball, Canoeing & Kayaking, 
Taekwondo & Wushu.     
(2) Training Course 
(i) 25 Coaches attended strength and conditioning programme at Univ ersity of Birminghem, 
UK from 12th to 26th May, 2017. 
(ii) 09 coaches attended Sports Science programme at University at Birmingham, UK from 
18th August to 1st September, 2017.  
(iii) 12 Coaches underwent 10 days training programme at University of Tsukuba, Japan from 
18 to 28 September, 2017.  
(iv) 02 Coaches attended 2nd Athletics and insturct course at Muju, South Korea from 1st to 17th 
November, 2017. 
 
(3) Coaching Development frame work 
(i) Training for coaches in Delhi- 5 faculty members from Fearlessness Consulting/Sports 
for life Canada conducted National Coaching Development Programme (Vision and Planning 
Conclave) a two day training programme for coaches in Delhi from 1st May to 2nd May, 2017. 
(ii) Training for coaches at Patiala-The said faculty members from Canada also conducted a 
National Orientation  Programme for Asstt. Coaches recruited in the year 2014 in various sports 
disciplines. The said programme was held at SAI NS NIS Patiala from 3rd to 6th May, 2017 and 
was attended by 149 coaches.  The programme was also attended by the Senior Coaches of SAI 
NS NIS Patiala. 
(iii) Induction Programme-Newly joined Asstt. Coaches underwent 4 weeks induction-cum-
orientation programme in Delhi and different regional centrers of SAI.    
(4) Retirement of Coaches  
 (i) 61 Coaches retired from SAI Service on attaining the age of superannuation. 
 (ii) 11 Coaches opted for voluntary retirement from SAI services. 
 
 (5) Strength of Coaches 
 Regular Coaches  -   1018   

 Contract Coaches  -       75  
 Deputation   -       05 
 
11.3 The Committee is of the view that training is the backbone of any sport and 
continuous training facility is required for improvement of talent in any sportspersons.  The 
Committee recommends that the optimum number of coaches should  be made available for 
the training programme and for that purpose, appointment of more coaches should  be done 
as per the requirement.  
 
SAI Centre of Excellence, Patiala 
11.4 The SAI Centre of Excellence at Patiala was set up in the Institute campus, in October, 
2000. At this Centre, training is provided to outstanding sportspersons for international 
competitions.This Centre has contributed a number of promising players for the national teams. 
Pay & Play Scheme of SAI 
11.5 The Scheme has been started by the SAI at its various centres, in order to ensure the 
optimum utilization of the available sports infrastructure ; and to earn some revenue.  Individual 
sportspersons and organi zation could use this infrastructure, for training on their own and 
competition purposes, on nominal payment.  There is no provision for coaching, under this 
Scheme. 
 
Come & Play Scheme of SAI 
 
11.6 This Scheme was launched at all SAI Centres , in the Country, on 1 October, 2011.The 
Scheme aims at mass participation in sports; systematic coaching support ; talent spotting ; and 
utilization of the available sports infrastructure at SAI centres, across the Country.  
Complementary membership is av ailable to international sportspersons, state & national level 
medal winners of the past three years, and children of BPL families; and concession for girls and 
children of Government schools.  Under the Scheme, players are provided systematic coaching; 
playing arena; non -consumable equipment; and maximum consumable  equipment. Age -specific 
competitions are also organized, in January and June, every year, for spotting the talent, to be 
nurtured further through various SAI Schemes. 
 
Publication of Sports Literature 
 

11.7 Primarily an academic institution, NIS maintains an exclusive department for publication 
of sports literature like books, journal, and public relation material like Newsletter, Brochures and 
Folders etc. The Institute has so far published abo ut 50 books on sports and sports sciences.  
Institute publishes a quarterly scientific journal, Sports Research, which carries experimental 
research and review articles, of reputed experts in the field.  The Institute also publishes a 
quarterly newsletter, about the programmes and activities of the Institute.  
11.8 As regards the major problems relating to the improvements in the academic standards in 
the Coach Education Programme, the Committee’s attention was drawn to the following : 
 
a) Since the past 2½ decades, foreign faculty is not available in any of the sports disciplines 
for academic purposes. 
 The present faculty at the Institute lacks foreign exposure and continuous updating of 
knowledge with reference to the course curriculum. 
 There should be a tie -up with the leading foreign institutions which could act as 
knowledge partners and where our faculty could be sent for higher education like in the 
past we had such understanding with the erstwhile GDR, Leipzig etc.  
 With regard to infrastructure, the Inst itute requires one indoor athletic track, so that 
athletes may get training throughout the year in all weather conditions.  
 
11.9 The Committee feels that the international exposure to our coaches and sportspersons 
is necessary when they are going to compe te with the sports persons of international 
standard. The Committee suggests that the Department of Sports should look into it and 
help the institute in hiring foreign coach/faculty to improve the coaching standard in our 
country. 
 
XII KHELO  INDIA AND OLYMPICS 
OLYMPICS 
12.1 Sports disciplines having potential to win medal or give respectable performance at the 
forthcoming mega international event are being identified and their plans for preparations are 
finalized.  Funds are allocated according to the requirement of specific sports disciplines vis-a-vis 
potential to win medal.  Sports discipline having won medals in the previous editions of the games 
and having potential to win medals in the forthcoming games are being provided with maximum 
budget.   Tentatively following sports disciplines are identified:- 

Olympic Games 2020 (9 sports disciplines)  – Athletics, Archery, Badminton, Boxing, Hockey, 
Shooting, Tennis, Weightlifting & Wrestling 
Asian Games 2018(27 sports disciplines) -   Athletics, Archery, Badminton, Boxing, Hockey,  
Shooting, Tennis, Weightlifting, Wrestling, Gymnastics, Kabaddi,Rowing, Aquatics (Swimming), 
Squash Racket, Wushu, Yachting, Golf, Table Tennis, Judo, Cycling, Volleyball, Football, 
Sepaktakraw, Basketball, Equestrian, Kayaking & Canoeing and Taekwondo. 
Commonwealth Games 2018(11 sports disciplines) -  Athletics, Badminton, Boxing, Hockey, 
Shooting, Weightlifting, Wrestling, Gymnastics, Squash Rackets, Table Tennis and Aquatics 
(Para-swimming).   
12.2 Further, a programme, namely TOP (Target Olympic Podium) , has been formulated within 
the overall ambit of National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) with the objective of identifying 
and supporting potential medal prospects for 2020 Olympic Games. Focused disciplines are 
Athletics, Archery, Badminton, Boxing, Wres tling and Shooting. The selected athletes are 
provided financial assistance for their customized training at Institutes having world class facilities 
and other necessary support. Benchmark for selection of athletes under the scheme is in relation to 
international standards. The Ministry reconstituted TOP Committee, which is headed by Shri 
AbhinavBindra, Olympic Gold Medalist, with the objective of identifying and supporting potential 
medal prospects for 2020 and 2024 Olympic Games under the “ Target Olympic Podium” scheme. 
The committee will select elite athletes to be provided with financial assistance for their 
customized training at Institutes having world class facilities and other necessary support. 
 
12.3 Similarly, SAI is reviewing its existing NSTC Sch eme (operates at school level on day 
boarding basis) and contemplating a more robust scheme to promote sports at school level. 
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS) is one organization having pan India presence and to 
promote sports among the school children SAI is in dialogue with the Sangathan to formulate a 
new initiative of sports promotion with them. 
12.4 The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry regarding preparation 
for 3 major events within a period of 2 years.  The Committee hopes th at these efforts would 
yield the desirable results in the forthcoming international events.  
 
KHELO INDIA 
 

12.5 A new scheme Khelo India was launched in 2016 -17 by merging all existing schemes 
Rajiv Gandhi Khel Abhiyan (RGKA), Urban Sports Infrastructure S cheme (USIS) and National 
Sports Talent Search System (NSTSS). The scheme was further reviewed and a revamped “Khelo 
India- National Programme for Development of Sports” Scheme was approved by Cabinet on 
20.09.2017 with a view to achieving the twin objecti ves of mass participation and promotion of 
excellence in sports. The revamped Khelo India Scheme has the following 12 verticals:- 
i) Play Field Development  
ii) Community Coaching Development  
iii) State Level Khelo India Centres 
iv) Annual Sports Competitions  
v) Talent Identification and Development   
vi) Utilisation and Creation/ Upgradation of Sports Infrastructure 
vii) Support to National/Regional/State Sports Academies 
viii) Physical Fitness of School going Children  
ix) Sports for Women 
x) Promotion of Sports among persons with disabilities 
xi) Sports for Peace and Development 
(xii) Promotion of rural and indigenous/tribal games 
 
12.6 The scheme was launched with a financial outlay of Rs. 1756 crore  for three years during 
the period from 2017-18 to 2019-20.  A National Talent Search Portal has been launched recently 
which will provide seamless access to upload individual achievements. In addition, the Gujarat 
model of mobile van will be adopted for c arrying out scientific evaluation at remote places for 
better identification of the talented sportspersons. During the talent identification drive sporting 
talent hubs, discipline wise, including indigenous games, shall be identified and duly mapped. 
Efforts will be made through sports academies to conduct special programmes to encourage such 
specific sport / game in that area. 
 
12.7 An amount of Rs.10 crore annually will be earmarked for maintenance of the Online 
Portal, identification of sporting talents through different avenues, including through advanced 
scientific profiling, short listing of talents and recommending the best talents for providing 
support. Identification of sporting talent will involve conduct of pan -India trials involving about 
50,000 to 1,00,000 children by Talent Scouts (to be engaged for the purpose), in association with 
States/UTs. An amount of Rs.50 crore will be earmarked annually for providing annual financial 
assistance, at the rate of Rs.5.00 lakh per annum for 1000 athletes, f or a period of 8 years, to 

identify athletes, under a Long Term Athlete Development Programme. Thus, Rs. 60 crore (Rs. 50 
crore for talent nurturing towards Training / Coaching, Consumables & Equipment, Sports 
Nutrition support, Sports Science Support etc. , and Rs. 10 crore for maintenance of online portal, 
Identification of Talent through trials, shortlisting of identified talents through Scientific profiling 
etc.). In the second year, when additional 1000 athletes are added, Rs. 110 crore (Rs. 50 crore ea ch 
for first year and second year athletes for their talent nurturing and Rs. 10 crore for talent search 
and development) and so on. The expenditure will be incurred on various components mentioned 
above and no fee/scholarship will be paid to the athlete. 
 
12.8 The revamped “Khelo India – National Programme for Development of Sports” scheme is 
being implemented from the current financial year 2017 -18.  The revamped Scheme, inter-alia, 
includes a vertical of ‘Promotion of rural and indigenous/tribal games’ a nd ‘Sports for Women’ to 
encourage rural youth and women sportspersons in the country. While all the components of the 
Khelo India Scheme are gender neutral and afford opportunities to women too for participating in 
sporting activities and development of s ports, it is proposed to hold annual national competitions 
for women. Emphasis will be laid on such sports disciplines where there is less participation of 
women so that more number of women will participate in such sports disciplines. These 
competitions will be held in the true spirit of the Olympic Movement in association with Indian 
Olympic Association and the participating National Sports Federations. The competitions will see 
participation of about 3000 athletes and officials. Accordingly, an amount of  Rs.10 Crore has been 
earmarked for conduct of the competitions.  
12.9 The Committee observes that the total budget outlay from the Khelo India Campaign 
is Rs. 1756 crore for  the  years  2017 -18 and 2019 -20.  For the financial year 2018 -19, the 
amount  al located for the financial year 2018 -19 is Rs.520.09 crore, an increase of Rs.370 
crore on RE 2017 -18.  The Committee feels that the revamped ‘ Khelo India Scheme’ is very 
ambitious  plan with an overall  development  of sports.  The Committee wants to know that 
through the National Talent  Search Portal, how many talents have been identified/selected 
so far for further training.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may make a 
concerted effort to make the campaign successful as it involves huge money a nd also carries 
the hopes  of millions to excel in the field of sports. 
 
Promotion of Sports among Women  

 
12.10   The revamped “Khelo India – National Programme for Development of Sports” scheme is 
being implemented from the current financial year 2017 -18.  The revamped Scheme, inter -
alia,includes a vertical of ‘Promotion of rural and indigenous/tribal games’ and ‘Sports for 
Women’ to encourage rural youth and wo men sportspersons in the country. The relevant 
provisions of the Scheme are given below:- 
‘While all the components of the Khelo India Scheme are gender neutral and afford opportunities 
to women too for participating in sporting activities and development of sports, it is proposed to 
hold annual national competitions for women. Emphasis will be laid on such sports disciplines 
where there is less participation of women so that more number of women will participate in such 
sports disciplines. These competitio ns will be held in the true spirit of the Olympic Movement in 
association with Indian Olympic Association and the participating National Sports Federations. 
The competitions will see participation of about 3000 athletes and officials.  Accordingly, an 
amount of Rs.10 Crore has been earmarked for conduct of the competitions. 
 
12.11    The Committee hopes that the steps taken for the promotion of sports among the 
women will show positive results in future.  There is a need of identifying talents from rural 
and backward areas also.    
 
XIII SPORTS FOR PEACE & DEVELOPMENT 
13.1 The Government of India, under the Special Package for J&K is providing funds to the 
tune of Rs.200 crore for enhancement of sports facilities in the State. To ensure optimal utilization 
of this infrastructure, soft support in terms of coaches, equipment, consumables, technical support, 
competition etc. will be provided. Efforts will be made to organize block  level competitions in 
respect of sports disciplines popular in the State of J&K for positive engagement of youth. Similar 
efforts will also be made in case of other extremism and terrorism affected and other disturbed 
areas. 
13.2     The Committee appreciates that the J&K has been given a special package for the 
promotion of sports and enhancement of sports facilities in the state. The Committee is of the 
view that since J&K is disturbed for years due to terrorism such packages will infuse new 
enthusiasm in youth towards sports and it will leave a positive imprint on their minds.  The 

Committee recommends that the budget earmarked for Jammu and Kashmir is utilized 
completely and so that the expected outcome may be achieved. 
XIV  PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 
14.1 The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports had launched a scheme namely “Scheme of Sports 
& Games for the Disabled” in the year 2009 -10 as a Central Sector Scheme (CSS). The objective 
of this scheme was broad -basing participative sports among the disabled. From the year 2017 -18, 
the Ministry of Youth Affairs & sports has revamped the Khelo India Scheme - National 
Programme of Sports Development and the revamped scheme was notified in October 2017. This 
scheme includes a component of  “Promotion of Sports among Persons with Disabilities”. The 
relevant provisions of the scheme are reproduced below:- 
a) financial assistance will be provided to States/UTs and SAI for creation of specialist 
sports infrastructure for persons with disabilities.  
b) Funds required for making stadia disabled friendly / barrier free will be accessed 
from Scheme for Implementation of Persons with Disabilities Act (SIPDA) of 
Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities. The funds provided under 
this head will be used for classification of players, equipment, training and 
preparation of teams for Paralympic Games and disciplines and competitions.  
c) Funding: An annual grant of Rs.15crore will be utilized for classification of Athletes, 
training of Indian classifie rs, and setting up/supporting Specialised Sports Training 
Centres for people with disabilities, coaching development, scholarships for coaching 
diploma both by differently abled persons and able -bodied persons seeking coaching 
for training para-athletes, and competitions 
 
14.2 Funds amounting to Rs. 0.84 crore has been released to SOB being the reimbursement of 
expenditure incurred by them on the activities conducted during 2016 -17. In addition, grant of Rs. 
5.23 crore has been released to SOB for conducting the activities during 2017-18. 
 
14.3 To identify talented disabled sports persons in the discipline of Athletics, Swimming and 
power lifting and to trained them to represent the county in various International Compe titions, 
SAI has established a SAI Training Centre for Para Athletes at SAI Regional Centre Gandhinagar 
(Gujarat). Presently, 28 talented Para Athletes are being trained in the above said discipline during 
2017-18. 
14.4  The Committee notes that the promot ion of sports among the persons with 
disabilities component has been merged with the scheme ‘ Khelo India ’.  The Committee 

wishes that in any case it should not loose the desired level of attention by such a merger. As 
the  Sportspersons with disabilities n eed extra care for their performance, the committee 
desires that the Department of Sports should continue to gives pecial attention  to them.  
 
Promotion of rural and indigenous/tribal games 
14.5 In order to showcase our rural and indigenous/tribal games, annual competitions will be 
held annually under the Khelo India Scheme in rural and indigenous/tribal games alternately. A 
dynamic and interactive website providing information on such games will also be put up. This 
will not only help disseminate informat ion and pique the curiosity of the present generation about 
these games but also encourage children and youth to take up these games in a major way, paving 
way for their future mainstreaming. 
XV NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND (NSDF) 
15.1 The National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) was established in 1998 under Charitable 
Endowment Act 1890 vide Government of India Notification dated 12 Nov 1998 with a view to 
mobilizing resources from non -governmental sources, including the private/corporate sector and 
non-resident Indians with Government providing matching grant. The NSDF supports persons to 
excel in the field by providing opportunities to train under coaches of international repute with 
technical scientific and psychological support and also in getting e xposure to international 
competitions. Various PSUs have been contributing to this fund to augment the Funding of 
Sports/Sportspersons in the Country. 
15.2 The Fund is managed by a Council constituted by the Central Government with Union 
Minister for Youth  Affairs and Sports as Chairperson.  The day to day working of thee Fund is 
managed by the Executive Committee headed by Secretary, Department of Sports. Objective of the 
NSDF are:- 
i.  To administer and apply the Fund for Promotion of Sports in general and S pecific 
Sports disciplines and individual sports in particular for achieving excellence in the 
National and International level. 
ii. To impart special training and coaching in relevant sports to sportspersons, coaches 
and sports specialists. 
iii. To construct and maintain infrastructure for promotion of sports and games. 
iv. To supply sports equipment to organizations and individuals for promotion of sports 
and games. 

v. To identify problems and take up research and development studies for providing 
support to excel in sports. 
vi. To promote international cooperation, in particular, exchanges which may promote the 
development of sports.  
vii. To provide low interest or interest free loans for projects related to any of the 
aforesaid objects. 
 
15.3 Corporate Sector, both public and private, is at present involved in a big manner in 
promotion and development of sports in the country. Corporate houses are associated with the 
Leagues for various Sports such as Indian Premier league (IPL) for Cricket, Ho ckey India League 
for Hockey, Indian Super League for Football, Indian Football League, Pro -Kabaddi League, 
Premier Badminton League for Badminton, Pro Wrestling League for wrestling. Corporate Houses 
are also involved in giving financial support directly to sportspersons and sports academies. Public 
Sector Undertakings such as Oil & Natural Gas Commission, Indian Oil Corporation, Steel 
Authority of India Limited, Air India and many other PSUs have set up Sports Promotion Boards 
and are giving financial sup port as well as employment to sportspersons. The money available in 
the National Sports Development Fund as on 19.01.2018 is  Rs 121.45 crore.  
 
15.4 NSDF provides financial assistance to sportspersons who are medal prospects in Olympics 
and other major in ternational competitions. The athletes, who are selected under Target Olympic 
Podium (TOP) Scheme, are also given assistance from NSDF. The Fund also provides assistance 
for development of sports infrastructure and other sports related activities. 
 
15.5 The Government has been regularly interacting with corporate entities both in public sector 
and private sector for making contributions to NSDF, for adopting one specific discipline for 
taking the overall responsibility including talent scouting, training and competitive exposure of the 
sports persons. Further, the Regional Heads of Sports Authority of India (SAI) have been asked to 
interact with PSUs/Banks for explaining the features of NSDF and seeking contributions to NSDF. 
A Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Brochure on SAI activities giving details of various SAI 
Centres under various SAI Sports Promotional Schemes, 10 Regional Centres and 02 Academic 
Institutions has been prepared giving various options for potential CSR partners to come up with 
proposals as per their convenience and availability of funds.  
 
15.6 Further, a meeting of major Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) and Public Sector Banks 
(PSBs) was held in New Delhi on 24.11.2016 under chairmanship of Union Minister of State 

(Independent Charge) for Youth Affairs and Sports to discuss promotion of sports in the country.  
Minister of  Sports (I/C) of Ministry of Youth Affairs called upon the PSUs and PSBs to come 
forward and contribute significantly to the cause of promotion of sports in the c ountry.  It was 
pointed out to them that they have a vast reach and resources which can be used for growth of 
sports in the country and they can contribute in various ways to promotion of sports including 
support for training of athletes, creation of sport s infrastructure and organization of sports 
competitions and exhorted them to contribute to the National Sports Development Fund (NSDF). 
 
15.7 There is shortfall of about Rs 58.00 crore in the matching contribution of GOI. 
Government makes contribution out  of the budgetary provisions to the Department of Sports. 
Department of Sports attempts to get more money allocated in the budget for making matching 
contributions to the NSDF.The following PSUs have assured contributions to NSDF: 
 
(a) Coal India Limited (CIL)  has assured total contribution of Rs 75.00 crore over a period 
of three years; first installment of Rs 25.00 crore has already been contributed to NSDF. 
(b) India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) has assured total contribution of 
Rs 30.00 crore over a period of three years; two installments of Rs 10.00 crore each 
(total Rs 20.00 crore) have already been contributed to NSDF. 
Further, the contributions to NSDF from other PSUs/PSBs from 2014 -15 onwards are also based 
on the assurances given by them during the meetings of the Parliamentary Committee. 
15.8 The Committee observes that National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) is a corpus 
which provides financial assistance to various institutes  and sportspersons for development 
of sports. It has given Rs .52.81 crore to such  organization/institutes/universities  in the year 
2017-18 for various sports activities.  The Committee is constrained to note that in the 
financial year 2017 -18, contribution to NSDF from Private and Public Sector is only RS 
60.05 lakh, whereas it was Rs.42.28 crore in the financial year 2016 -17.  There is a steep fall 
in the contribution in NSDF. The Committee is very much concerned  about this decline. The 
Committee desires that the Department should find out the reasons therefor an d apprise the 
same to Committee along with  the suggestions so as to what can be done to give it a boost in 
its action taken replies.  
****** 
 