 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA          228 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
THE INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26 
TH  NOVEMBER, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK  SABHA ON 26 TH  NOVEMBER, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
NOVEMBER, 2010/AGRAHAYANA, 1932  (SAKA)       
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
THE INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26 TH  NOVEMBER, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK  SABHA ON 26 TH  NOVEMBER, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
NOVEMBER, 2010/AGRAHAYANA, 1932  (SAKA) 
 
 
 

 
CONTENTS  
   
  PAGES  
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. P REFACE ......................................................................................................................... (iii) 
3. R EPORT ........................................................................................................................... 1-9 
4. O BSERVATIONS /R ECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ––  AT A GLANCE .......................... 10-14 
5. M INUTES ....................................................................................................................... 15-20 
6. A NNEXURE ....................................................................................................................... 21-36 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON HRD  
(2010-11)  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes   ––   Chairman  
 2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai  
 3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
 4. Shri Prakash Javadekar  
 5. Shri M. Rama Jois 
 6. Shri Pramod Kureel 
 7. Shri N.K. Singh  
 8. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
 9. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare  
 10. Shri N. Balaganga 
  LOK SABHA  
 11. Shri Kirti Azad 
 12. Shri P.K. Biju 
 13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela  
 14. Shri Angadi Suresh Chanabasappa  
 15. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
 16. Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar 
 17. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 18. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
 19. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhao  
 20. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
 21. Shri P. Kumar 
 22. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 23. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad  
 24. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola 
 25. Shri Tapas Paul 
 26. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
 27. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
 28. Shri Joseph Toppo 
 29. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’  
 30. Shri P. Viswanathan 
 31. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
 
 

SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
PREFACE  
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliam entary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authorized by the  Committee, present this Two Hundred and 
Twenty-eighth Report of the Committee on the Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2010*.  
2.  The Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 30 
August, 2010. In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultati on with the Speaker, Lok Sabha referred** the 
Bill to the Committee on 15 September, 2010 for examination and report within three months. 
3.  The Committee considered the Bill in two sittin gs held on 1 October, and 25 November, 2010. 
4.   On 1 October, 2010, the Committee heard the Se cretary, Department of Higher Education on 
various provisions of the Bill. 
5.  The Committee, while drafting the Report, relie d on the following:–– 
(i) Background Note on the Bill and Note on the cla uses of the Bill received from the 
Department of Higher Education; 
(ii) Presentation made and clarifications given by the Secretary, Department of Higher 
Education; and 
(iii) Feedback received from the Department on the questionnaire and the issues raised by the 
Members during the course of the oral evidence of the Secretary. 
6.  The Committee considered the Draft Report on th e Bill and adopted the same in its meeting held 
on 25 November, 2010. 
7.   For facility of reference, observations and re commendations of the Committee have been 
printed in bold letters at the end of the Report. 
 
 
 
OSCAR FERNANDES 
 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman,  
November  25, 2010 Department-related Parliamentary  
Agrahayana  4, 1932 ( Saka ) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development. 
 
 
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 2 dated the 30th August, 2010. 
**Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II No. 47661 dated the 15th September, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
REPORT  
I.   INTRODUCTION  
1.1   The Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Bill , 2010 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 30 
August, 2010 and referred to the Department-related  Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development on 15 September, 2010 for examination and report thereon. 
1.2  The Institutes of Technology Act, 1961 was ena cted by the Parliament in December, 1961 to 
declare certain Institutes of Technology to be the institutions of national importance. There were seven 
IITs situated at Kharagpur, Bombay, Delhi, Kanpur, Madras, Guwahati and Roorkee in the beginning 
of the Eleventh Plan which were governed by the afo re mentioned Act. The Cabinet in its meeting 
help on 17 July, 2008 approved the establishment of  eight more IITs at Bhubaneswar, Gandhinagar, 
Hyderabad, Patna, Jodhpur, Ropar, Mandi and Indore.  All the eight new IITs have been registered as 
societies under the Societies Registration Act, 186 0, pending their inclusion in the Institutes of 
Technology Act, 1961. 
1.3  The Government of India in pursuance of its ov erall vision to have more Indian institutes of 
technology level institutions in the country had co nstituted an Expert Committee to identify certain 
academic institutions which had the potential for being upgraded to the level of the Indian Institutes of 
Technology. The Institute of Technology, Banaras Hi ndu University was identified as one of such 
institutions. This is in line with the overall thin king of the Government to have more Indian Institut es 
of Technology level institutions by upgrading exist ing institutions as well as creating new Indian 
Institutes of Technology. 
1.4  The Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Bill,  2010 seeks to amend the Institutes of 
Technology Act, 1961 with a view to achieve the following objectives:–– 
(a) to include eight new Indian Institutes of Techn ology and declare them as institutions of 
national importance; 
(b) to declare the Institute of Technology, Banaras  Hindu University as an institution of 
national importance and integrate it with the Indian Institutes of Technology system;  
(c) to empower the Central Government to notify ‘Zo nes’ in the country for advising the State 
Government and the Union territory included in its zone in the matter of technical 
education and any technical issue referred by them to the institute for advice; 
(d) to cast upon the Indian Institutes of Technolog y, a duty to support States or Union 
Territories technologically in their ‘Zones’ and address their technological problems; and 
(e) to incorporate the newly set up Indian Institut es of Technology and Indian Institute of 
Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi under the provisions of the Act. 
1.5   The Secretary, Department of Higher Education  during her presentation before the Committee 
stated that the mandate of the Department was to en hance access, equity and quality of higher 
education in the country and the existing IITs were  the prime example in this direction. The proposed 
legislation before the Committee indicated a signif icant step in fulfilling the aspirations of young 

students so far as higher education is concerned. T he Committee was informed that the objective for 
bringing about the present amendments in the Instit utes of Technology Act, 1961 was three-fold. The 
primary objective was to include the eight-plus one  institutions under the Umbrella Act. Secondly, it 
would empower the Central Government to notify zone s in the country for IITs to be able to advise 
State Governments and oversee technical education i nstitutions in the States and Union territories. 
Lastly, the IITs would also be entrusted with the r esponsibility to oversee technological problems of 
the States/Union territories located in the zone placed in their charge. The Secretary drew the attention 
of the Committee to the fact that with the enhanced  number of IITs, it would be possible to achieve 
the objective of increasing the Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) in higher education. 
1.6   About the Department’s preparedness with resp ect to infrastructure, faculty and the contingency 
plan with respect to the eight new IITs, it was inf ormed that the Department was getting adequate 
support from the State Governments in providing inf rastructure till permanent campus/site for these 
institutions was earmarked. It was further informed  that the Department was committed to providing 
infrastructure and faculty to the students on a yea r-wise basis so as to ensure that the entire teachi ng-
learning process could continue without any hindran ce. As for the conversion of Institute of 
Technology, Banaras Hindu University into an IIT and its having a separate structure, it was informed 
that in order to conform to the recommendations of the Yash Pal Committee, the Department has been 
endeavoring to ensure that multiple disciplines wer e taught in all the institutions of the higher 
education. As IT, BHU already had the history of teaching multiple disciplines, it was advisable that it 
should be integrated with IIT system for synergy an d at the same time retain its linkage with the 
parent institution. 
II.   CONSULTATION PROCESS 
2.1  The Committee was informed that all the concer ned Ministries/Departments i.e.  the Department 
of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department, 
Ministry of Law & Justice, Ministry of Science & Te chnology and the Planning Commission were 
consulted with regard to the proposed amendments in  the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961. 
Committee’s attention was drawn to a very specific suggestion made by the Planning Commission, i.e.  
instead of amending the Act again and again, a thor ough review of the Act was required so as to 
include all features that were necessary in the cur rent context. Following broad indicators were 
highlighted by the Planning Commission in this regard: 
– the amendments should be comprehensive enough to reflect the global best practices and 
norms and standards of governance, finance, teaching, research, collaboration etc. 
– they should prescribe core performance indicators  in order to optimize return on public 
investments and for ensuring public accountability. 
– scope for creativity and innovation also needed t o be provided. 
2.2   On being asked to clarify the reasons for not  going for a holistic review of the Act, especially in 
the light of specific recommendation made by the Pl anning Commission, the Department informed 
that the present legislation had a limited objectiv e of incorporating the eight new IITs along with II T, 
BHU (Varanasi) in the IT Act 1961, at the earliest. Any thorough or comprehensive review of the Act 
would have required discussion with the IIT Council /Standing Committee of the IIT Council as well 
as other experts which would have been a prolonged exercise. The Committee was also given to 

understand that only limited amendments were being brought for the present, keeping in view the 
interest of students of Institute of Technology, BH U (Varanasi) who have to be awarded degree in a 
short span of time. 
2.3  The Committee observes that the Institutes of Techn ology Act had been in force for more 
than fifty years. During such a long period of its implementation, both the Department and 
different IITs would have received valuable suggest ions for bringing in amendments in the Act. 
Not only this, with phenomenal advancement in techn ical education across the globe, our 
premier technical institutions like IITs needed to function, keeping pace with the fast changing 
scenario. The Committee would, accordingly, like to  emphasize that the institutes of technology 
were required to function on a larger scale by adop ting inter-disciplinary approach, 
collaborating with other institutions and were supp osed to be the institutes of national 
importance. It would be, therefore, advisable to undertake a comprehensive review of the Act to 
include all such features that may bring these IITs  at par with global practices, norms and 
standards of governance, finance, teaching, research and collaboration.  
2.4   The Committee is happy to note that the Department has already constituted a Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Prof. Anil Kakodkar in February, 2010 to suggest a roadmap for the 
autonomy and future of the IITs which inter-alia  would also review the Institutes of Technology 
Act, 1961. It was further informed that Kakodkar Committee was likely to submit its Report by 
the end of November, 2010 after which a comprehensi ve amendment of the Institutes of 
Technology Act may be undertaken.  
III.  Committee’s observations/recommendations on v arious clauses of the Bill are given in the 
succeeding paragraphs: 
Clause 2 : Amendment of Section 2  
3.1   Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 2  of the Act relating to ‘Declaration of certain 
Institutions as Institutions of national importance  by incorporating eight newly established IITs at 
Bhubaneswar, Gandhinagar, Hyderabad, Indore, Jodhpu r, Mandi, Patna and Ropar under the Act 
along with the Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varansi. 
3.2  The Committee in principle welcomes the inclusion o f eight newly established IITs and 
conversion of IT, BHU into the system of IITs. The Committee hopes that concerted efforts 
would be made by all concerned to make these instit utions ‘institutions of national importance’ 
in the real sense.  
Clause 3: Section 3: Definitions  
3.3  Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert a definit ion of the term ‘zone’ as follows:--- 
‘(m) “zone” in relation to an Institute, means such  group of States and Union territories as the 
Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.’ 
3.4  On a specific query about the criteria for dec iding the different zones, the Committee was 
informed that as per section 11 (c) of the Institut es of Technology Act, 1961, Board of Governors of 
IIT, inter-alia  includes one person nominated by the Government of  each of the State comprising the 
zone in which the institute was situated. As per th e explanation given below this section, the 
expression ‘zone’ meant a zone for the time being d emarcated by All India Council for Technical 

Education for the purpose of the Act. Establishment of eight new IITs on 17th July, 2008 necessitated 
reconstitution of zones. Accordingly, zones have be en reconstituted to ensure State representation on 
the Boards of Governors of IITs taking into account  principles of continuity and avoidance of 
duplication. In view of the incorporation of defini tion of the term ‘zone’ under section 2 relating to  
‘Definitions’, Explanation given under section II(c) was proposed to be deleted. 
3.5  The Committee observes that earlier the seven IITs at Delhi, Kanpur, Kharagpur, 
Roorkee, Bombay, Madras and Guwahati were covering the entire country. Now with eight 
more IITs at various places, distribution of States  and Union territories would be more 
balanced. While making a comparative analysis of th e existing zones and reconstituted zones, 
the Committee finds that with the exception of IIT,  Guwahati, number of States/UTs falling 
under the jurisdiction of other existing IITs has b een reduced. The Committee would, however, 
like to point out that while IIT, Roorkee (earlier University of Roorkee) which was earlier 
having Himachal Pradesh, Haryana and Uttaranchal states has been assigned now Haryana and 
Uttarakhand, there is no mention of any zone with r espect to IIT (Banaras Hindu University) 
Varanasi. Reasons for this exception are not known to the Committee. The Committee would 
like to point out that the immediate impact of this  omission would be that the Board of 
Governors of IIT (Banaras Hindu University) Varanas i would not be having a State nominee. 
Secondly, the proposed amendments in section 6 rela ting to ‘Powers’ of Institute’ whereunder 
every IIT is envisaged to support and collaborate w ith technical institutions located in the zone 
and advise the State Government/UT in its zone in t he matter of technical education would not 
be applicable on IIT (Banaras Hindu University) Var anasi. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that corrective steps in this direction need to be taken by bringing in required 
modification in the proposed amendments.  
Clause 7: Section 6: Powers of Institute  
3.6   Section 6 of the Act specifies the powers and  duties to be performed by every Institute of 
Technology. Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert su b-clauses (ma) and (mb) after clause (m) in section  
6 as indicated below: 
“6(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Institute shall exercise the following powers 
and perform the following duties, namely:–– 
*  * * 
(ma) supporting and collaborating with technical ed ucation institutions located in the zone with 
a view to enhance their quality and capability; 
(mb)  advising the State Government and the Union territory included in its zone in the matter of 
technical education and any technological issue ref erred by them to the Institute for 
advice.” 
  Both the provisions seek to cast upon the IITs ad ditional duties of supporting and collaborating 
with technical education institutions and advising the States in technical education matters within th e 
zone they are situated. 
3.7  The Committee takes note of the reservations of the  Ministry of Finance which had 
pointed out that by virtue of these new clauses, an  obligation had been cast upon the IITs to 
strive to meet the technological needs of the State s in their zone as they would be required to 

provide training, facilitate study visits, share la boratory and other resources with technical 
education institutions located in their zones. Not only this, the new clauses would considerably 
constrain the autonomy of these Institutes by makin g the duty mandatory and forcing the 
Institutes to undertake activities for which they m ay not be having the capacity. It was also 
pointed out by the Ministry of Finance that undertaking activities as envisaged in proposed sub-
clauses (ma) and (mb) may further constrain the res ources of the Institutes in performing their 
primary duties of imparting technical education and  carrying out research. The Ministry had, 
accordingly, recommended the deletion of these new clauses. Alternatively, the Ministry had 
suggested to have a separate sub-section (2) of section 6 and the use of the word ‘may’ in place of 
the word ‘shall’, thereby removing the mandatory element from the responsibilities proposed to 
be assigned to the IITs.  
3.8   The Committee also takes note of the views of the M inistry of Science and Technology 
which had observed that the proposed duty of meeting the technological needs of the States/UTs 
appeared good in principle. However, a larger suppo rt system would be required for IITs in 
terms of increased number of faculty members, well- equipped labs with larger space capacity 
etc.  
3.9  The Committee observes that the written feedback fu rnished to it by the Department 
clearly indicates that it had found merit in the al ternate provision in respect of clause 6(1) (ma) 
and (mb) as suggested by the Ministry of Finance. T he Committee also takes note of the 
alternate provision section 6(1A) formulated by the  Department in response to reservation 
expressed by the Ministries of Finance and Science and Technology. The Committee is, however, 
somewhat surprised by the entirely different stand subsequently taken by the Department in 
response to a specific query raised by it in this regard.  
3.10   The Committee was informed that while drafti ng the Bill it was felt that a distinction 
between the other duties and powers of the Institut e as listed in Section 6 (1) of the Act may not be 
required as the proposed amendment was only advisor y in nature. It was further informed that even 
the present dispensation of the word ‘shall’ in section 6 had not constrained the functioning of the IITs 
in terms of time or resources. The Department empha sized that before incorporating clauses (ma) and 
(mb) in section 6 of the Act, the IITs were fully c onsulted and the Council of IITs decided to amend 
section 6 of the IT Act, 1961 to cast upon IITs the  duty to Support the State and Union Territories 
situated in their zone. It was the Council of IITs which suggested that IIT may strive to meet 
technological needs of the States and Union Territo ries within their zones which would include 
supporting and collaborating with technical educati on institutions and also to advise State 
Governments and Union Territories in the matter of technical education and technological problems 
referred by them to the Institute for advice. 
3.11  The Committee is not against the idea of IITs suppo rting and collaborating with technical 
education institutions located in their zones(s) or  attending to the technological problems of the 
States, provided the issues of resources, capacity and faculties are addressed beforehand 
appropriately. Further, the technical education ins titutions themselves should also have the 
vision to deal with the new demands of the society and the industry. The Committee is, however, 
not inclined to agree with the Department’s view on  the usage of the word ‘shall’ in both the 
clauses (ma) and (mb) that the intention of the dra fting was that the State Governments and 
Union Territory Administrations could seek the advi ce of the IITs on technological matters. 

While ‘shall’ pertains to the rest of the section s o far as clauses (ma) and (mb) were concerned 
they were both advisory in nature. The Committee wo uld like to point out that section 6(1) 
where the proposed clauses (ma) and (mb) are to be added enlists the powers and duties of the 
IITs which are mandatory in nature due to the use o f the word ‘shall’. Therefore, it cannot be 
concluded that the clauses are advisory in nature. In view of the above, the Committee 
recommends that after section 6(1), section 6(IA) as indicated below may be added: 
“(1A) subject to the provisions of this Act, every Institute may also perform the following 
duties namely:--- 
To strive to meet the technological needs of the States and Union Territories included in its 
zone by, inter alia : 
(i) Supporting and collaborating with technical edu cation institutions located in the 
zone with a view to enhance their quality and capability, 
(ii) Advising Governments of States and Union Terri tories included in the zone in the 
matter of technical education and regarding any tec hnological problems referred by 
them to the Institute for advice.  
Clause 8: Section 11: Board of Governors  
3.12  Clause 8 seeks to insert a proviso whereunder  Board of Governors of IIT (BHU), Varansi shall 
consist of Vice-Chairman to be nominated after a period of three years from the commencement of the 
Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 2010 and also two persons to be nominated by the 
Executive Council of BHU from amongst its members including its Vice Chancellor. 
3.13   On being asked about the reasons for providi ng for the post of Vice-Chairman for 
IIT(BHU), Varansi, the Committee was informed that this addition was meant for keeping the linkage 
of IIT(BHU) with the Banaras Hindu University in some manner so that the inter disciplinary research 
could be given impetus. In this connection, it was suggested that the Vice-Chancellor of BHU could 
be the ex-officio  Vice-Chairman of the new IIT, BHU. It was further informed that the post of Vice-
Chairman was approved in view of consistent demand from IT(BHU), although the issue of creation 
of post of Vice-Chairman was not agreed to in the 40th meeting of the Council of IITs. 
3.14  The Committee is of the view that composition of th e Board of Governors should be 
uniform for all the IITs. The Committee, however, observes that with the proposed amendments 
the Board of Governors of IIT(BHU) will be having, besides the Chairman and Vice-Chairman, 
nine members, with Vice-Chairman and two persons to  be nominated by the Executive Council 
of BHU from amongst its members. Secondly, applicab ility of any zone in respect of IIT(BHU) 
being not clear, there will be no nomination from any State. In contrast, all the other IITs will be 
having besides a Chairman, seven members and State nominees, slightly varying in accordance 
with the zone assigned to them. The Committee is of  the view that composition of the Board of 
Governors IIT(BHU) vis-a-vis  other IITs needs to be reviewed. If the post of Vi ce-Chairman 
holds good for IT(BHU) it should prove viable for o ther IITs also. Secondly, linkage with BHU 
can be easily maintained by having one member to be  nominated by the Executive Council of 
BHU.  
IV.   Miscellaneous  

4.1   Out of the eight new IITs, six IITs at Bhubaneshwar , Gandhinagar, Hyderabad, Patna, 
Jodhpur and Ropar commenced their academic session in 2008-09 and the remaining two IITs 
at Indore and Mandi have started their academic ses sion in 2009-10. The Committee observes 
that doubling the number of IITs from existing seve n IITs to fifteen IITs will go a long way in 
enhancing the outreach of technical education for o ur young students. However, this initiative 
needs to be supplemented by making the new IITs ful ly functional in the real sense. Mere 
declaration of these Institutes as Institutions of national importance indicates only a quantitative 
achievement. Fulfilment of qualitative parameters of these new IITs does not seem to be feasible 
in the near future. The Committee is constrained to  make such an observation in the light of 
their present status as intimated by the Department . Although site for the permanent campus 
for all the eight new IITs has been finalized, land  has been handed over in respect of IIT, 
Hyderabad only. While the process of handing over o f land for IITs at Patna, Bhubaneshwar, 
Mandi and Indore is going on, the same is yet to st art in respect of IITs at Jodhpur and 
Gandhinagar. No significant progress seems to have been made so far with the Master Plan 
being ready only in the case of IIT, Hyderabad. Aga inst such a backdrop, the tentative dates of 
shifting of IITs to permanent campus ranging from D ecember, 2011 to 2013 clearly indicates 
that the first batch of Engineering Graduates passi ng out from these IITs will not have the 
opportunity to avail the benefits of a well equippe d, premier Institute. Present temporary 
campuses located at sites like Ordnance Factory or Polytechnics cannot be considered an ideal 
setting for institutions of national importance. Th e Committee, accordingly, recommends that 
time-bound action plan for getting ready the perman ent campuses for the new IITs needs to be 
chalked out immediately, if not already done and constantly monitored by the Department in co-
ordination with all the implementing agencies.  
4.2   Shortage of faculty was the other crucial are a that engaged the attention of the Committee. The 
Committee notes that the main objective of setting up a large number of IITs, being providing quality 
access in higher education, question of quality fac ulty arises naturally. The Committee is well aware 
of the fact that lack of qualified teachers is evid ent in all categories of higher education instituti ons, 
both in the private and Government Sector. Even the  well-established IITs have been showing this 
disturbing trend. 
4.3  On a specific query in this regard, the Commit tee was informed that the Department had been 
making concerted efforts in this regard. Some of th e steps taken by the Department included 
increasing the retirement age for teachers; making the teaching career more attractive by offering 
better pay scales and service conditions, hiring te achers on contract basis and making the contract 
terms more flexible and simpler. In addition, the c oncept of ‘mentor institutions’ has been evolved 
which would make available teachers to the new IITs  in the interregnum till the new Institution are 
able to come up on their own and get all infrastruc ture and faculty as per their requirements. The 
Committee also takes note of the following initiati ves taken by the Department for attracting 
qualified teachers for new IITs: 
– Faculty from abroad especially NRI and Overseas I ndians are being brought in 
through a vigorous campaign through the alumni network. 
– Provision for re-employment of superannuated teac hers has already been 
implemented. 

– Enhanced scholarships for Ph.D students to attrac t students to the teaching 
profession.  
– Salary of faculty has been revised considerably a fter the 6th Pay Commission. 
  The Committee while welcoming the above initiativ es would like to emphasize that IITs 
must also be equipped with facilities for best world practices in the context of research activities 
to be taken by their faculty.  
4.4   The Committee observes that all the IITs, with the exception of IITs at Mandi (2009-10) 
and Indore (2009-10) have started their session from 2008-09. While the student intake has been 
showing an increasing trend in all the new IITs, th e same cannot be said about the teachers. 30 
teachers per year per IIT were required to be in pl ace during the first three years. However, 
following details made available to the Committee depict a very discouraging scenario so far.  
(As on 17/8/2010 ) 
Name Sanctioned Faculty In Position Vacancy 
Strength    
IIT Gandhinagar 90 44 46 
IIT Ropar 90 33 57 
IIT Jodhpur 90 20 70 
IIT Bhubaneshwar 90 42 48 
IIT Hyderabad 90 46 44 
IIT Patna 90 44 46 
IIT Mandi 60 16 44 
IIT Indore 60 30 30 
  
  The Committee can well imagine the plight of stud ents in these new IITs with quite a few 
of them being M-Tech or Ph.D students being made to  pursue professional education in the 
absence of qualified and experienced faculty.  
4.5  Not only this, the Committee views with serious con cern status of Faculty in the well 
established IITs. Following details furnished by the Department are self-revealing:  
(As on 17/8/2010 ) 
Name Sanctioned Faculty In Position Vacancy 
Strength    
IIT Bombay 637 491 146 
IIT Delhi 578 416 162 

IIT Kanpur 484 349 135 
IIT Kharagpur 870 530 340 
IIT Madras 566 449 117 
IIT Guwahati 340 260 80 
IIT Roorkee 577 378 199 
 
4.6  The Committee observes that a number of initiatives  for attracting teachers have been 
taken/proposed to be taken by the Department. Howev er, their impact does not seem to be 
reflected at the ground level as borne out by the d etails of faculty in place both at the existing 
and new IITs.  
4.7   Nobody can deny the fact that an Institute of Techn ology can not become an Institute of 
National Importance unless it has the required numb er of qualified and experienced teachers. 
With further expansion in terms of number of higher education institutions, this problem would 
acquire a gigantic proportion. The Committee is of the firm opinion that this persistent problem 
area needs to be addressed on an urgent basis. The Committee is of the view that an effective 
monitoring mechanism may be evolved so as to ensure  that all the initiatives taken/proposed to 
be taken for attracting teachers are implemented by all the IITs. Such initiatives also need to be 
given adequate publicity. The Committee would also like the Department to initiate a Faculty 
Recruitment Mission on a permanent basis to attract  young people having potential to teach. 
Besides that, a well built system of in-house train ing facilities for faculty of IITs at regular 
interval also needs to be evolved.  
4.8  The Committee further notes that as the order of th e day is advancement of knowledge 
through inter-disciplinary interaction, it would ma ke more sense if these institutes were made 
autonomous in the real sense of the term. The Committee while taking note of the Department’s 
reply that IITs were guaranteed a complete autonomy  and that they were free to fraine their 
own curriculum, standards and conduct their learnin g-teaching exercise, would like to 
emphasize that if IITs are to be exceptional instit utions, they should be allowed to grow as 
advanced education institutions keeping pace with the global levels.  
4.9  The Committee would further like to place on record  its concern about the objective of 
conversion of an Institute into an IIT. According to the Committee, this transformation can help 
an Institute/University in converting into an Institution of advanced study and research only if it 
was accompanied by an inter-disciplinary approach a nd collaboration in higher education 
otherwise the Institute and its inner content remai ns the same with only the nomenclature 
getting changed. The Committee, therefore, would li ke the Department to take note of its 
concern and ensure that these institutes are made t o evolve as advanced institutions of teaching 
and research.  
5.  The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of t he Bill without any amendments. 
6.  The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes. 

7.  The Committee recommends that the Bill may be p assed after incorporating the 
Amendments/additions suggested by it. 
8.  The Committee would like the Department to subm it a note with reasons on the 
recommendations/suggestions which could not be incorporated in the Bill. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS – AT A GLANCE  
II.  CONSULTATION PROCESS 
  The Committee observes that the Institutes of Tec hnology Act had been in force for more 
than fifty years. During such a long period of its implementation, both the Department and 
different IITs would have received valuable suggest ions for bringing in amendments in the Act. 
Not only this, with phenomenal advancement in techn ical education across the globe, our 
premier technical institutions like IITs needed to function, keeping pace with the fast changing 
scenario. The Committee would, accordingly, like to  emphasize that the institutes of technology 
were required to function on a larger scale by adop ting inter-disciplinary approach 
collaborating with other institutions and were supp osed to be the institutes of national 
importance. It would be, therefore, advisable to undertake a comprehensive review of the Act to, 
include all such features that may bring these IITs  at par with global practices, norms and 
standards of governance, finance, teaching, research and collaboration.  (Para 2.3)  
  The Committee is happy to note that the Departmen t has already constituted a Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Prof. Anil Kakodkar in Fe bruary, 2010 to suggest a road map for 
the autonomy and future of the IITs which inter-alia  would also review the Institutes of 
Technology Act, 1961. It was further informed that Kakodkar Committee was likely to submit 
its Report by the end of November, 2010 after which  a comprehensive amendment of the 
Institutes of Technology Act may be undertaken.  (Para 2.4)  
III.  Clause 2 : Amendment of Section 2 
  The Committee in principle welcomes the inclusion  of eight newly established IITs and 
conversion of IT, BHU into the system of IITs. The Committee hopes that concerted efforts 
would be made by all concerned to make these instit utions ‘institutions of national importance’ 
in the real sense.  (Para 3.1)  
Clause 3: Section 3: Definitions 
  The Committee observes that earlier the seven IIT s at Delhi, Kanpur, Kharagpur, 
Roorkee, Bombay, Madras and Guwahati were covering the entire country. Now with eight 
more IITs at various places, distribution of States  and Union territories would be more 
balanced. While making a comparative analysis of th e existing zones and reconstituted zones, 
the Committee finds that with the exception of IIT,  Guwahati, number of States/UTs falling 
under the jurisdiction of other existing IITs has b een reduced. The Committee would, however, 
like to point out that while lIT, Roorkee (earlier University of Roorkee) which was earlier 
having Himachal Pradesh, Haryana and Uttaranchal St ates has been assigned now Haryana 
and Uttarakhand, there is no mention of any zone wi th respect to IIT (Banaras Hindu 
University) Varanasi. Reasons for this exception ar e not known to the Committee. The 
Committee would like to point out that the immediat e impact of this omission would be that the 
Board of Governors of IIT (Banaras Hindu University ) Varanasi would not be having a State 
nominee. Secondly, the proposed amendments in secti on 6 relating to ‘Powers’ of Institute’ 
whereunder every lIT is envisaged to support and co llaborate with technical institutions located 
in the zone and advise the State Government/UT in i ts zone in the matter of technical education 
would not be applicable on lIT (Banaras Hindu Unive rsity) Varanasi. The Committee, 

accordingly, recommends that corrective steps in th is direction need to be taken by bringing in 
required modification in the proposed amendments. ( Para 3.5)  
Clause 7 : Section 6: Powers of Institute 
  The Committee takes note of the reservations of t he Ministry of Finance which had 
pointed out that by virtue of these new clauses, an  obligation had been cast upon the IITs to 
strive to meet the technological needs of the State s in their zone as they would be required to 
provide training, facilitate study visits, share la boratory and other resources with technical 
education institutions located in their zones. Not only this, the new clauses would considerably 
constrain the autonomy of these Institutes by makin g the duty mandatory and forcing the 
Institutes to undertake activities for which they m ay not be having the capacity. It was also 
pointed out by the Ministry of Finance that undertaking activities as envisaged in proposed sub-
clauses (ma) and (mb) may further constrain the res ources of the Institutes in performing their 
primary duties of imparting technical education and  carrying out research. The Ministry had, 
accordingly, recommended the deletion of these new clauses. Alternatively, the Ministry had 
suggested to have a separate sub-section (2) of section 6 and the use of the word ‘may’ in place of 
the word ‘shall’, thereby removing the mandatory element from the responsibilities proposed to 
be assigned to the IITs. (Para 3.7)  
  The Committee also takes note of the views of the  Ministry of Science and Technology 
which had observed that the proposed duty of meeting the technological needs of the States/UTs 
appeared good in principle. However, a larger suppo rt system would be required for IITs in 
terms of increased number of faculty members, well- equipped labs with larger space capacity 
etc. (Para 3.8)  
  The Committee observes that the written feedback furnished to it by the Department 
clearly indicates that it had found merit in the al ternate provision in respect of clause 6(1) (ma) 
and (mb) as suggested by the Ministry of Finance. T he Committee also takes note of the 
alternate provision section 6(1A) formulated by the  Department in response to reservation 
expressed by the Ministries of Finance and Science and Technology. The Committee is, however, 
somewhat surprised by the entirely different stand subsequently taken by the Department in 
response to a specific query raised by it in this regard. (Para 3.9)  
  The Committee is not against the idea of IITs sup porting and collaborating with technical 
education institutions located in their zones(s) or  attending to the technological problems of the 
States, provided the issues of resources, capacity and faculties are addressed beforehand 
appropriately. Further, the technical education ins titutions themselves should also have the 
vision to deal with the new demands of the society and the industry. The Committee is, however, 
not inclined to agree with the Department’s view on  the usage of the word ‘shall’ in both the 
clauses (ma) and (mb) that the intention of the dra fting was that the State Governments and 
Union Territory Administrations could seek the advi ce of the IITs on technological matters. 
While ‘shall’ pertains to the rest of the section s o far as clauses (ma) and (mb) were concerned 
they were both advisory in nature. The Committee wo uld like to point out that section 6(1) 
where the proposed clauses (ma) and (mb) are to be added enlists the powers and duties of the 
IITs which are mandatory in nature due to the use o f the word ‘shall’. Therefore, it cannot be 

concluded that the clauses are advisory in nature. In view of the above, the Committee 
recommends that after section 6(1), section 6(IA) as indicated below may be added: 
“(IA) subject to the provisions of this Act, every Institute may also perform the following 
duties namely:- 
To strive to meet the technological needs of the St ates and Union territories included in its 
zone by, inter alia : 
(iii) Supporting and collaborating with technical e ducation institutions, located in the 
zone with a view to enhance their quality and capability, 
(iv) Advising Governments of States and Union Terri tories included in the zone in the 
matter of technical education and regarding any tec hnological problems referred by 
them to the Institute for advice. (Para 3.11)  
Clause 8: Section 11: Board of Governors 
  The Committee is of the view that composition of the Board of Governors should be 
uniform for all the IITs. The Committee, however, observes that with the proposed amendments 
the Board of Governors of IT(BHU) will be having, b esides the Chairman and Vice-Chairman, 
nine members, with Vice-Chairman and two persons to  be nominated by the Executive Council 
of BHU from amongst its members. Secondly, applicab ility of any zone in respect of IT(BHU) 
being not clear, there will be no nomination from any State. In contrast, all the other IITs will be 
having besides a Chairman, seven members and State nominees, slightly varying in accordance 
with the zone assigned to them. The Committee is of  the view that compostion of the Board of 
Governors IT(BHU) vis-a-vis  other IITs needs to be reviewed. If the post of Vi ce-Chairman 
holds good for IT(BHU) it should prove viable for o ther IITs also. Secondly, linkage with BHU 
can be easily maintained by having one member to be  nominated by the Executive Council of 
BHU.                                                                                                                                         (Para 3.14)  
IV.  Miscellaneous 
  Out of the eight new IITs, six IITs at Bhubaneshw ar, Gandhinagar, Hyderabad, Patna, 
Jodhpur and Ropar commenced their academic session in 2008-09 and the remaining two IITs 
at Indore and Mandi have started their academic ses sion in 2009-10. The Committee observes 
that doubling the number of IITs from existing seve n IITs to fifteen IITs will go a long way in 
enhancing the outreach of technical education for o ur young students. However, this initiative 
needs to be supplemented by making the new IITs ful ly functional in the real sense. Mere 
declaration of these Institutes as Institutions of national importance indicates only a quantitative 
achievement. Fulfillment of qualitative parameters of these new IITs does not seem to be feasible 
in the near future. The Committee is constrained to  make such an observation in the light of 
their present status as intimated by the Department . Although site for the permanent campus 
for all the eight new IITs has been finalized, land  has been handed over in respect of IIT, 
Hyderabad only. While the process of handing over o f land for IITs at Patna, Bhubaneshwar, 
Mandi and Indore is going on, the same is yet to st art in respect of IITs at Jodhpur and 
Gandhinagar. No significant progress seems to have been made so far with the Master Plan 
being ready only in the case of lIT, Hyderabad. Aga inst such a backdrop, the tentative dates of 

shifting of IITs to permanent campus ranging from D ecember, 2011 to 2013 clearly indicates 
that the first batch of Engineering Graduates passi ng out from these IITs will not have the 
opportunity to avail the benefits of a well equippe d, premier Institute. Present temporary 
campuses located at sites like Ordnance Factory or Polytechnics cannot be considered an ideal 
setting for institutions of national importance. Th e Committee, accordingly, recommends that 
time-bound action plan for getting ready the perman ent campuses for the new IITs needs to be 
chalked out immediately, if not already done and constantly monitored by the Department in co-
ordination with all the implementing agencies. (Para 4.1)  
  The Committee also takes note of the following in itiatives taken by the Department for 
attracting qualified teachers for new IITs: 
– Faculty from abroad especially NRI and Overseas I ndians are being brought in 
through a vigorous campaign through the alumni network 
– Provision for re-employment of superannuated teac hers has already been 
implemented. 
– Enhanced scholarships for Ph.D students to attrac t students to the teaching 
profession. 
– Salary of faculty has been revised considerably a fter the Sixth Pay Commission. 
  The Committee while welcoming the above initiativ es would like to emphasize that IITs 
must also be equipped with facilities for best world practices in the context of research activities 
to be taken by their faculty. (Para 4.3)  
  Nobody can deny the fact that an Institute of Tec hnology can not become an Institute of 
National Importance unless it has the required numb er of qualified and experienced teachers. 
With further expansion in terms of number of higher education institutions, this problem would 
acquire a gigantic proportion. The Committee is of the firm opinion that this persistent problem 
area needs to be addressed on an urgent basis. The Committee is of the view that an effective 
monitoring mechanism may be evolved so as to ensure  that all the initiatives taken/proposed to 
be taken for attracting teachers are implemented by all the IITs. Such initiatives also need to be 
given adequate publicity. The Committee would also like the Department to initiate a Faculty 
Recruitment Mission on a permanent basis to attract  young people having potential to teach. 
Besides that, a well built system of in-house train ing facilities for faculty of IITs at regular 
interval also needs to be evolved. (Para 4.7)  
  The Committee further notes that as the order of the day is advancement of knowledge 
through inter-disciplinary interaction, it would ma ke more sense if these institutes were made 
autonomous in the real sense of the term. The Commi ttee while taking note of the Departments 
reply that IITs were guaranteed a complete autonomy  and that they were free to frame their 
own curriculum standards and conduct their learning -teaching exercise, would like to 
emphasize that if IITs are to be exceptional instit utions, they should be allowed to grow as 
advanced education institutions keeping pace with the global levels. (Para 4.8)  

 The Committee would further like to place on recor d its concern about the objective of 
conversion of an Institute into an IIT. According to the Committee, this transformation can help 
an Institute/University in converting into an Institution of advanced study and research only if it 
was accompanied by an inter-disciplinary approach and collaboration in higher education other 
wise the Institute and its inner content remains th e same with only the nomenclature getting 
changed. The Committee, therefore, would like the D epartment to take note of its concern and 
ensure that these institutes are made to evolve as advanced institutions of teaching and research.    
 
                                                                                                                                                   (Para 4.9) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
III  
THIRD  MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.30 P.M. on Friday, the 1st October, 
2010 in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman  
 2.  Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
 3.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
 4.  Shri Pramod Kureel 
 5.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 6.  Shri N. Balaganga 
  LOK  SABHA  
 7.  Shri P.K. Biju 
 8.  Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
 9.  Shri Rahul Gandhi  
 10.  Shri P. Kumar 
 11.  Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 12.  Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
 13.  Shri Sheesh Ram Ola 
 14.  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
 15.  Shri Ashok Tanwar 
 16.  Shri Joseph Toppo 
 17.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
 18.  Shri P. Viswanathan 
  LIST  OF  WITNESSES  
 I. DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
  MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
Shrimati Vibha Puri Das, Secretary 
Shri S.K. Ray, Addl. Secretary & F.A. 
Ms. Pratima Dixit, Director 
Prof. K.P. Singh, Director, Institute of Technology (BHU) 
Prof. A.K. Tripathi, Professor, Institute of Technology (BHU)  
Prof. P.K. Mukherjee, Professor, Institute of Technology (BHU) 
 
 

SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director 
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2.   At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the membe rs to the meeting of the Committee and 
intimated them about the agenda for the day which w as to interact with the Secretary, Department of 
Higher Education on the Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and *  *  *. 
3. * * * 
4. * * * 
5. * * * 
6. * * * 
7.   Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of t he Secretary, Department of Higher Education on 
the Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2010 . The Chairman and members raised certain 
queries which were replied to by the Secretary. The  Committee decided to send a questionnaire to the 
Department for detailed replies. 
8.   During the course of interaction with the Secr etary, a very crucial issue of shortage of faculty in 
the new IITs was raised by the members. The Committee was of the view that with massive expansion 
of higher education in the recent years, the proble m of lack of qualified teachers was being observed 
in all categories of higher educational institution s. The Committee, therefore, decided to take up thi s 
subject for detailed study. 
9.   A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.  
10.   The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 
P.M. to meet again on Wednesday, the 13th October, 
2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** Relate to other matters.  
 
 

IX  
NINTH  MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 25th 
November, 2010 in Room No ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman  
 2.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
 3.  Shri M. Rama Jois 
 4.  Shri Pramod Kureel 
 5.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 6.  Shri N. Balaganga 
  LOK  SABHA  
 7. Shri P. K. Biju 
 8. Shri Jeetendrasingh Bundela 
 9. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
 10.  Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 11. Shri Prasanta Kumar Mazumdar  
 12. Shri Joseph Toppo 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director 
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the member s to the meeting of the Committee. *  *  *. 
3. * * * 
4. * * * 
5.   The Committee, then, considered and adopted th e draft 228th Report of the Committee on the 
Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2010 wit h few modifications. It also decided to present 
this Report in both the Houses of Parliament on 26t h November, 2010. The Committee authorized the 
Chairman and in his absence Shri Pramod Kureel to p resent the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri 
P.C. Gaddigoudar and in his absence Shri Joseph Toppo to lay the Report in the Lok Sabha. 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7.  The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 
P.M. 
*** Relate to other matters.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE LOK SABHA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 109 of 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59 of 1961. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 
3. 
THE INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 
2010 
A 
BILL  
further to amend the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961.  
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year  of the 
Republic of India as follows:– 
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Institutes of Technolo gy 
(Amendment) Act, 2010.  
 ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Cent ral 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gaz ette, 
appoint. 
2.    In the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961 (herei nafter 
referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, for the words "and 
the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee". the w ords "the 
Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, the Indian  Institute of 
Technology, Bhubaneshwar, the Indian Institute of Technology, 
Gandhi Nagar, the Indian Institute of Technology, H yderabad, 
the Indian Institute of Technology, Indore, the Ind ian Institute 
of Technology, Jodhpur, the Indian Institute of Tec hnology, 
Mandi, the Indian Institute of Technology, Patna, t he Indian 
Institute of Technology, Ropar and the Indian Insti tute of 
Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi" sh all be 
substituted. 
3.   In section 3 of the principal Act,– 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 of 1915. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ( a) in clause ( c), after sub-clause ( iv ), the following sub-
clauses shall be inserted, namely:– 
 "( v) in relation to the society known as the Indian In stitute 
of Technology, Bhubaneshwar, the Indian Institute o f 
Technology, Bhubaneshwar; 
 ( vi ) in relation to the society known as the Indian In stitute 
of Technology, Gandhinagar, the Indian Institute of  
Technology, Gandhinagar; 
 ( vii ) in relation to the society known as the Indian In stitute 
of Technology, Hyderabad, the Indian Institute of T echnology, 
Hyderabad; 
 ( viii ) in relation to the society known as the Indian In stitute 
of Technology, Indore, the Indian Institute of Tech nology, 
Indore; 
 ( ix ) in relation to the society known as the Indian In stitute 
of Technology, Rajasthan, the Indian Institute of T echnology, 
Jodhpur; 
 ( x) in relation to the society known as the Indian Institute of 
Technology, Mandi, the Indian Institute of Technology, Mandi; 
 ( xi ) in relation to the society known as the Indian In stitute 
of Technology, Patna, the Indian Institute of Techn ology, 
Patna; 
 ( xii ) in relation to the society known as the Indian In stitute 
of Technology, Punjab, the Indian Institute of Tech nology, 
Ropar; 
 ( xiii ) in relation to the Institute of Technology, Banar as 
Hindu University, referred to in the Statute 25(A)( 1) of the 
Statutes set out in the Schedule to the Banaras Hindu University 
Act, 1915, the Indian Institute of Technology (Bana ras Hindu 
University), Varanasi;"; 
 ( b) after clause ( g), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:– 
 '( ga ) "Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu Universit y" 
means the Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu Un iversity, 
referred to in Statute 25(A)( 1) of the Statutes set out in the 
Schedule to the Banaras Hindu University Act, 1915;'; 
 ( c) in clause ( j), after sub-clause ( iii ), the following sub-
clauses shall be inserted. namely:– 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 of 1915. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new section 
5B. 
 
Effect of incorporation 
of Indian Institute of 
 "( iv ) the Indian Institute of Technology, Bhubaneshwar;  
 ( v) the Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar; 
 ( vi ) the Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad;  
 ( vii ) the Indian Institute of Technology, Indore; 
 ( viii ) the Indian Institute of Technology, Rajasthan; 
 ( ix ) the Indian Institute of Technology, Mandi; 
 ( x) the Indian Institute of Technology, Patna;  
 ( xi ) the Indian Institute of Technology, Punjab;": 
 ( d) after clause ( 1), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:– 
 '( m) "zone", in relation to an Institute, means such g roup of 
States and Union territories as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify.'. 
4.  In section 4 of the principal Act, after sub-secti on ( 1C ), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–  
 "( 1D ) The Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu 
University shall, on such incorporation, be called the Indian 
Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi.". 
5.   In section 5 of the principal Act, the Explanation  shall be 
numbered as Explanation 1  thereof and after Explanation  1 as 
so numbered, the following Explanation  shall be inserted, 
namely:– 
 " Explanation 2. – The reference in this section to the 
commencement of this Act shall be construed in rela tion to the 
Indian Institute of Technology, Bhubaneshwar, the I ndian 
Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar, the Indian In stitute of 
Technology, Hyderabad, the Indian Institute of Tech nology, 
Indore, the Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur , the Indian 
Institute of Technology, Mandi, the Indian Institut e of 
Technology, Patna and the Indian Institute of Techn ology, 
Ropar. as the reference to the date on which the pr ovisions of 
the Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 2010 come into 
force.". 
6.  After section 5A of the principal Act, the followi ng section 
shall be inserted, namely:–  
 "5B. On and from the commencement of the Institute s of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Technology (Banaras 
Hindu University). 
Varanasi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technology (Amendment) Act, 2010, –  
 ( a) any reference to the Institute of Technology. Ban aras 
Hindu University in any law for the time being in f orce (other 
than this Act) or in any contract or other instrume nt shall be 
deemed as a reference to the Indian Institute of Te chnology 
(Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi; 
 ( b) all property, movable and immovable, of or belong ing 
to the Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu Unive rsity, shall 
vest in the Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras  Hindu 
University), Varanasi; 
 ( c) all rights and liabilities of the Institute of Te chnology, 
Banaras Hindu University shall be transferred to, a nd be the 
rights and liabilities of, the Indian Institute of Technology 
(Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi; 
 ( d) every person employed in the Institute of Technol ogy, 
Banaras Hindu University immediately before such 
commencement shall hold his office or service in th e Indian 
Institute of Technology, (Banaras Hindu University) , Varanasi 
by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and up on the 
same terms and conditions and with the same rights and 
privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, providen t fund and 
other matters as he would have held the same if this Act had not 
been passed and shall continue to do so unless and until his 
employment is terminated or until such tenure, remu neration 
and terms and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes: 
 Provided that if the alteration so made is not acc eptable to 
such employee, his employment may be terminated by the 
Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu Unive rsity), 
Varanasi in accordance with the terms of the contra ct with the 
employee or, if no provision is made therein in thi s behalf, on 
payment to him by the Indian Institute of Technolog y (Banaras 
Hindu University), Varanasi of compensation equival ent to 
three months' remuneration in the case of permanent employees 
and one month's remuneration in the case of other employees: 
 Provided further that any reference, by whatever f orm of 
words, to the Director of the Institute of Technolo gy, Banaras 
Hindu University in any law for the time being in f orce, or in 
any instrument or other document, shall be construe d as a 
reference to the Director of the Indian Institute o f Technology 
(Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi; and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
16 of 1915. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 of 1915. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 
11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ( e) on the commencement of the Institutes of Technolo gy 
(Amendment), Act, 2010.– 
 ( i) the Vice-Chancellor of the Banaras Hindu Universi ty, 
appointed under the provisions of the Banaras Hindu University 
Act, 1915 shall be deemed to have been appointed as  ex officio  
Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Indian In stitute of 
Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi und er this 
Act, and shall hold office for a period of three ye ars with effect 
from such commencement; 
 ( ii ) the Director of the Institute of Technology, Bana ras 
Hindu University, appointed under the provisions of  the 
Banaras Hindu University Act, 1915 shall be deemed to have 
been appointed as Director of the Indian Institute of 
Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi und er this 
Act, and shall hold his office till Director is app ointed under 
this Act. 
 Explanation. – The reference in this section to the 
commencement of this Act shall be construed in rela tion to the 
Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu Unive rsity), 
Varanasi as the reference to the date on which the provisions of 
the Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 2010 come into 
force.". 
7.   In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section  ( 1), after 
clause ( m), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:– 
 "( ma ) supporting and collaborating with technical 
education institutions located in the zone with a v iew to 
enhance their quality and capability; 
 ( mb ) advising the State Government and the Union territory 
included in its zone in the matter of technical education and any 
technological issue referred by them to the Institu te for 
advice.". 
8.   In section 11 of the principal Act,– 
 ( i) after clause ( e), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:– 
 "Provided that in the case of the Indian Institute  of 
Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi,– 
 ( a) the Board of such Institute shall consist of Vice -
Chairman to be nominated, after a period of three y ears from 
the commencement of the Institutes of Technology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 of 1915. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 
14. 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 
38. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 of 1915. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Amendment) Act, 2010, by the Executive Council ref erred to 
in clause ( d) of section 2 of the Banaras Hindu University Act,  
1915, from amongst its members including its Vice-
Chancellor;"; 
 ( b) two persons to be nominated by the Executive Coun cil 
referred to in clause ( d) of section 2 of the Banaras Hindu 
University Act, 1915, from amongst its members incl uding its 
Vice-Chancellor;"; 
 ( ii ) the Explanation  shall be omitted. 
9.  In section 14 of the principal Act. after clause ( e), the 
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:–  
 "Provided that in case of the Indian Institute of Technology 
(Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi, three members  shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council referred to in c lause ( d) of 
section 2 of the Banaras Hindu University Act, 1915.". 
10.  In section 38 of the principal Act,– 
 ( a) after clause ( i), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:– 
 "( j) until the first Statutes and Ordinances in relati on to the 
Indian Institute of Technology, Bhubaneswar, the In dian 
Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar, the Indian In stitute of 
Technology, Hyderabad, the Indian Institute of Tech nology, 
Indore, the Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur , the Indian 
Institute of Technology, Mandi, the Indian Institut e of 
Technology, Patna and the Indian Institute of Techn ology, 
Ropar are made under this Act, the Statutes and Ord inances of 
such Institute, as in force immediately before the 
commencement of the Institutes of Technology (Amend ment) 
Act, 2010, shall apply to those Institutes with nec essary 
modifications and adaptations in so far as they are  not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act; 
 ( k) the Executive Council referred to in clause ( d) of 
section 2 of the Banaras Hindu University Act, 1915 , 
functioning as such immediately before the commence ment of 
the Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 2010,  shall 
continue to so function until a new Board is consti tuted for the 
Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu Unive rsity) 
Varanasi under this Act. But on the constitution of a new Board 
under this Act, the Executive Council of the Banara s Hindu 
University shall cease to function so far as the In dian Institute 
of Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi is 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 of 1915. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 of 1915.  
 

 
 
 
16 of 1915. 
 
concerned; 
 ( l) the Academic Council, referred to in clause ( a) of 
section 2 of the Banaras Hindu University Act, 1915 , 
functioning as such immediately before the commence ment of 
the Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 2010 shall 
continue to so function until a new Senate is const ituted for the 
Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu Unive rsity), 
Varanasi under this Act. But on the constitution of  a new 
Senate under this Act the Academic Council of the B anaras 
Hindu University shall cease to function so far as the Indian 
Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi; 
 ( m) until the first Statutes and the Ordinances in re lation to 
the Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu U niversity) 
Varanasi are made under this Act, the Statutes and Ordinances 
as are applicable to the Indian Institute of Techno logy, Kanpur 
immediately before the commencement of the Institut es of 
Technology (Amendment) Act, 2010, shall apply to th e Indian 
Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University) Varanasi 
with the necessary modifications and adaptations in  so far as 
they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act; 
 ( n) notwithstanding anything contained in the Institu tes of 
Technology (Amendment) Act, 2010, any student who j oined 
classes of the Indian Institute of Technology, Bana ras Hindu 
University on or after the commencement of 2006-200 7 
academic session or completed the courses on or aft er 2009-
2010 academic session shall for the purpose of clau se ( b) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 6 be deemed to have pursued a course 
of study in the Indian Institute of Technology (Ban aras Hindu 
University), Varanasi provided that such student has not already 
been awarded degree or diploma for the same course of study; 
 ( o) if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions 
of the Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 20 10, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the O fficial 
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with  the 
provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessa ry for 
removing the difficulty; 
 Provided that no order shall be made under this cl ause after 
the expiry of two years from the commencement of th e 
Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 2010: 
 Provided further that every order made under this clause 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 

House of Parliament."; 
 ( b) after Explanation 2, the following Explanation sh all be 
inserted, namely:– 
 " Explanation 3. – The reference in clauses ( k), ( l) and ( m) of 
this section to the commencement of this Act shall be construed 
in relation to the Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu 
University), Varanasi, as the reference to the date  on which the 
provisions of the Institutes of Technology (Amendme nt) Act, 
2010 come into force.". 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
 The Institutes of Technology Act, 1961 was enacted  by Parliament in December, 1961 to inter 
alia, declare certain Institutes of Technology to be institutions of national importance. 
 2. The Government of India has set up eight new In dian Institutes of Technology as registered 
societies. These institutes need to be brought with in the ambit of the aforesaid Act for the purpose o f 
declaring them as institutions of national importance. 
 3. The Expert Committee constituted by the Governm ent of India identified certain academic 
institutions which had the potential for being upgraded to the level of Indian Institutes of Technology. 
The Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu University was identified as one of such institutions. The 
Government of India made an announcement in March, 2008 of its intention to convert Institute of 
Technology, Banaras Hindu University into an Indian Institute of Technology. This is in line with the 
overall thinking of the Government to have more Ind ian Institutes of Technology level institutions by 
upgrading existing institutions as well as creating new Indian Institutes of Technology. 
 4. Accordingly, a need has been felt to amend the said Act to effectuate the conversion of 
Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu University into Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu 
University), Varanasi and to bring the eight newly set up Indian Institutes of Technology within its 
ambit. The Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Bil l, 2010 inter alia , seeks to make the following 
amendments to the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961, namely:–– 
 ( a) to include eight new Indian Institutes of Technol ogy and declare them as institutions 
of national importance; 
 ( b) to declare the Institute of Technology, Banaras H indu University as an institution of 
national importance and integrate it with the Indian Institutes of Technology system; 
 ( c) to empower the Central Government to notify "Zone s" in the country for advising the 
State Government and the Union territory included i n its zone in the matter of technical 
education and any technical issue referred by them to the institute for advice; 
 ( d) to cast upon the Indian Institutes of Technology,  a duty to support States or Union 
Territories technologically in their "Zones" and address their technological problems; 
 ( e) to incorporate the newly set up Indian Institutes  of Technology and Indian Institute of 
Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi under the provisions of the Act; 
 ( f) to provide that till such time the Statutes and O rdinances of new Indian Institutes of 
Technology and Indian Institute of Technology (Bana ras Hindu University), Varanasi come 
into force, the new Indian Institutes of Technology , including Indian Institute of Technology 
(Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi, would be gove rned by the existing Statutes and 
Ordinances of such Indian Institute of Technology, as in force; 
 5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above Objectives.  
      N
EW DELHI ; 
The 23rd August , 2010.   KAPIL SIBAL 
 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM  
 Clause 2 of the Institutes of Technology (Amendmen t) Bill, 2010 provides for establishment of 
eight new Indian Institutes of Technology including  conversion of Institute of Technology - Banaras 
Hindu University into Indian Institute of Technolog y Varanasi and their declaration as institutions of  
national importance. 
 2. The estimated expenditure for establishment of eight new IITs would be about Rs. 4232.00 
crores as non-recurring and Rs. 1848.00 crores as r ecurring expenditure for a six years period. The 
estimated non-recurring expenditure for conversion of IT-BHU into IIT (BHU), Varanasi would be 
about Rs. 160.00 crores during the Eleventh Plan pe riod. The recurring expenditure would be 
approximately Rs. 131.48 crores per annum during 2010-1l and 2011-12. 
 3. The expenditure for establishment of eight new IITs and conversion of IT-BHU into IIT 
(BHU) Varanasi would be met from the Consolidated F und of India through the budgetary provision 
under the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION  
 Sub-clause (a) of clause 10 of the Bill inserts ne w clauses (j) and (m) in section 38 of the Act 
which empowers the Institutes of Technology to make  Statutes and Ordinances. New clause (o) 
empowers the Central Government, by order to remove  certain difficulties which may appear to it to 
be necessary or expedient. Further, such order is n ot to be made under the said clause after the expir y 
of a period of two years from the commencement of t he proposed legislation. Every such order shall 
be laid before each House of Parliament. 
 2. The matters in respect of which the statutes, o rdinances or orders may be made or issued are 
matters of administrative details and procedure and as such, the delegation of legislative power is of  a 
normal character. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Declaration of certain 
institutions as 
institutions of 
national importance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Incorporation of 
institutes. 
 
Effect of incorpora-
tion of institutes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Powers of Institutes. 
 
 
ANNEXURE  
EXTRACTS FROM THE INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY ACT , 1961 
(59 OF  1961) 
* * * * *  
 2.  Whereas the objects of the institutions know as th e Indian 
Institute of Bombay, the College of Engineering and Technology, Delhi, 
the Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati, Assam , the Indian 
Institute of Technology, Kanpur, the Indian Institu te of Technology, 
Madras and the Indian Institute of Technology, Roor kee are such as to 
make them institutions of national importance, it i s hereby declared that 
each such institution is an institution of national importance. 
 3.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–– 
* * * * * 
  ( c) "corresponding Institute" means,–– 
* * * * * 
 ( j) "society" means any of the following societies re gistered under 
the Societies Registration Act, 1860, namely:–– 
     4.  ( 1) * * * * 
 5.  On and from the commencement of this Act,–– 
* * * * * 
 Explanation. –– The reference in this section to the commencemen t 
of this Act shall be construed in relation to the I ndian Institute of 
Technology, Guwahati as the reference to the date o n which the 
provisions of the Institutes of the Technology (Ame ndment) Act, 1994 
come into force. 
* * * * * 
 6.  ( 1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Inst itute shall 
exercise the following powers and perform the follo wing duties, 
namely:–– 
* * * * * 
 11.  The Board of an Institute shall consist of the fol lowing person, 
namely:–– 
* * * * * 
 ( e) two professors of the Institute, to be nominated by the Senate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 of 1860. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 of 1994. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Board of Governors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Explanation. –– In this section, the expression "zone" means a z one 
as for the time being demarcated by the All-India C ouncil for Technical 
Education for the purposes of this Act. 
* * * * * 
 14.  The Senate of the Institute shall consist of the f ollowing 
persons, namely:–– 
* * * * * 
 ( e) such other member of the staff as may be laid dow n in the 
Statutes, 
* * * * * 
 38.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,–– 
* * * * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Senate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transitional provisions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LOK  SABHA  
–––––––– 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961. 
 
–––––––– 
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Human Resource Development)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 