165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
HUNDRED SIXTY - FIFTH REPORT
 
ON
THE COMMISSIONS FOR PROTECTION OF CHILD
 RIGHTS BILL, 2005
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18TH AUGUST, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON  18TH AUGUST, 2005)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2005/ SRAVANA, 1927 (SAKA)
 
 
C O N T E N T S
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                      
3.REPORT                                                                                                        
4.OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                                                                  
5.MINUTES      
6.ANNEXURES                     
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
 
1. Shri Vayalar Ravi                      ¾        Chairman
 
      MEMBERS
            RAJYA SABHA
 
2.
      *Shri Eduardo Faleiro
3. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
4. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
5. Shrimati Chandra Kala Pandey
6.      Shri S. Anbalagan
7. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
8. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
9. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
10. Shri Anil Dhirubhai Ambani
 
LOK SABHA
 
11. Shri Basudeb Barman
12. Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
13. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
14. Shri R. L. Jalappa
15. Shri Ramswarup Koli

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
16. Shri Manjunath Kunnur
17. Shri Y.G. Mahajan
18. Shri Manoj Kumar
19. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
20. Dr. Thokchom Meinya
21.  Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
22. Mohd. Mukim
23. Shri Tukaram R. Patil
24. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
25. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
26. Shri Tufani Saroj
27. Smt. P. Satheedevi
28. Shri A.R. Shaheen
29. Smt. Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
30. Shri K. Virupaxappa
31. Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Ceased to be a member of the Committee on expiry of his term  in Rajya Sabha  w.e.f  28th July , 2005
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Smt, Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji  B., Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
INTRODUCTION
1.
                  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development,
having been authorized by the Committee, present this Hundred Sixty-fifth Report of the Committee on ‘The
Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Bill, 2005’*.
 
2.
                  In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman,
Rajya Sabha, referred** the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Bill, 2005 (Annexure-1) as introduced in the
Rajya Sabha on the 2 nd May 2005 and pending therein, to the Committee on the 27 th May, 2005 for examination and
report within three months.
 
3.                  The Committee considered the Bill in six sittings held on 2nd June, 16th June, 27th June, 6 July, 4th August and
17th August, 2005.
 
4.
                  At its meeting held on the 2 nd June 2005, the Committee decided that given the wider ramifications of the Bill,
views/suggestions may be invited from individuals/ organizations/institutions  interested on the subject matter of the Bill.
Accordingly notice to this effect  was issued in the leading dailies of the country.   Wide publicity was also given through
Doordarshan and All India Radio (Annexure-II).  In response to the advertisement, the Committee received 28
memoranda from various Individuals/Institutions/NGOs etc. The details are placed at Annexure-III.
 
5.         On 16
th June, 2005 the Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Women and Child Development on
the Bill. In its sittings held on 27th June, and 6th July 2005, the Committee heard experts, representatives of associations

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
and NGOs working for child welfare (Annexure-IV).  The Committee in its sitting held on 4th August 2005, took up
‘clause-by-clause consideration’ of the Bill where the representatives of the Department of Women and Child
Development, Legislative Department and the Department of  Social Justice and Empowerment and Ministry of Labour
were also present for clarifications etc.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Published in Gazette of Indian Extraordinary part II Section 2, dated 2
th May 2005.
**Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No. 42211dated 30th May, 2005.
 
6.         The Committee in its sitting held on the 17th August, 2005, considered and adopted the draft report with
amendments in clauses 3, 4, 5, 5(2), 7(1), 7(2), 8, sub-clause (1) of clause 10, sub-clause (4) of clause 10, clause 13, 14,
sub-clause (2) of clause 16 and clause 25 of the Bill. Besides the Committee added 4 new clauses i.e. 10A, 14A, 14B, and
14C.
7.   The Committee has relied on the following in finalizing the Report:
(i)         Self Contained Background Note on the Bill 2005;
(ii)
                Memoranda received on the Bill from various individuals, organizations etc;
(iii)               Comments of the Department on the questionnaire;
(iv)              oral evidence on the Bill;
(v)                UN Declaration on Survival, Protection and Development of Children;
(vi)              National Charter for Children, 2003;
(vii)             Document titled a World Fit for Children;
(viii)           Statement giving comparison of provisions with other National Commissions;
(ix)              Verbatim record of the Oral evidence taken on the Bill; and
(x)                Presentation and clarification by Secretary of the Department of Women and Child Development.
8.         On behalf of the Committee, I would like to thank the officials of the Department of Women and Child
Development for providing necessary inputs and clarifications on the provisions of  the Bill. I would like to acknowledge
with thanks the experts/ NGOs who deposed before the Committee and submitted their valuable suggestions on the
subject matter of the Bill.  
9.         For facility of reference, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been provided in bold letters
in the body of the report.
NEW DELHI            
August 17, 2005
Sravana 26, 1927, (Saka)
VAYALAR RAVI
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development
                                                                                                      
REPORT
 
The Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Bill, 2005 seeks to provide for the constitution of a National
Commission and State Commissions for Protection of Child Rights and Children’s Courts for providing speedy trial of
offences against children or of violation of child rights and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The
Committee was informed that India had the largest child population in the world.  Constitution of India guarantees several
rights to the children including equality before law, free and compulsory primary education to all children between six to
fourteen years, prohibition of trafficking and forced labour by children and employment of children below the age of
fourteen years in factories, mines or hazardous occupations. The Constitution requires the State to make special
provisions for children and directs that the policy of the State shall be such that their tender age was not abused. Inspite of
Government's commitment to give children opportunities, healthy environment and facilities to develop, they continue to

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
remain vulnerable to various forms of abuse, exploitation, maltreatment, etc. 
2.         Various child-related indicators present a very dismal scenario, despite a number of child-related laws and
schemes being administered by different Departments.  The Committee was given to understand that currently child
protection, welfare and their development is being taken care of by several agencies.  As a result, many gap areas are
noticed in this regard.  The Secretary emphasised that there was a need for an authority which could take a holistic view
of the matters pertaining to children and oversee the existing programmes, policies, laws etc. for them with a view to
getting these implemented and recommend corrective measures, if required.
3.         The Government of India is a party to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) which requires
signatory States to realign their child laws with a view to make their legal, judicial and administrative systems child-
friendly as well as sensitive to interests of the child.  Thus, in view of the national as well as international developments,
the need for a National Commission for Protection of Child Rights was being felt by all those working for the
development and welfare of the children including the Government.  The Committee was informed that the draft National
Commission for Protection of Child Rights Bill, 2005 is the outcome of a prolonged and extensive interaction with all the
States/UTs, Ministries, Departments, institutions, voluntary organisations, experts, social workers, etc.
4.         The Secretary, Department of Women and Child Development apprised the Committee at its meeting held on the
16
th June, 2005 about the background for bringing the proposed legislation on protection of child rights before
Parliament.  The Secretary then touched upon the basic features of the Bill giving an idea about the composition and
appointment of the Commission, its functions, special powers, constitution of State Commissions, Children's Courts,
procedure for enquiry, presentation of its reports and other miscellaneous provisions.
5.         The Committee had invited views/suggestions from the general public through a notice published in newspapers
on various provisions of the Bill.  The Committee also had the opportunity to hear the views of a number of Voluntary
Organizations, social workers and legal persons working in areas like child welfare, protection of child rights, their
education and health, juvenile justice, child labour, etc.  These extensive deliberations and also the voluminous written
material received from all concerned, has greatly helped the Committee in formulating its views on various provisions of
this special piece of legislation, very much required for the development and protection of our future generations. 
6.         The Committee likes to place on record its appreciation for the Department for bringing out this Bill for setting up
a Commission to protect and promote interests of Children. Keeping in view vast population of children in the country,
mostly being under-privileged, setting up of such a Commission is the need of the hour. Protecting and promoting their
interest is laudable and challenging as well. The Committee after detailed discussion came to the conclusion that certain
provisions, particularly those relating to appointment and removal of the Chairperson and members of the proposed
Commission, its functions, procedure  for transaction of its business, powers relating to inquiries and children's courts
needed some amendments.  Need for adding more provisions was felt necessary to provide required autonomy as well as
powers to the proposed Commission so that it can carry out its mandate in a more credible and effective manner and it
does not appear to be a body controlled by the Government of the day.            
7.         The Committee at its meeting held on the 4
th August, 2005 took up the Bill for Clause-by-clause consideration.
The Clauses where amendments were suggested by the Committee have been discussed in the succeeding
paragraphs.        
Clause 3
8.         Sub-clause (2) (b) of clause 3 provides that six members of the Commission will be appointed by the Central
Government from amongst persons of eminence, ability, integrity, standing and experience from different fields
mentioned therein. Although, this particular Clause, Committee notes, does not prohibit the appointment of women as

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
members of the Commission, almost everybody who appeared before it, impressed upon the need for having an explicit
provision that at least two of its members have to be women.  It is a well-known fact that women have better
understanding of problems as well as needs of the children.  By ensuring women representation in the Commission, cause
of children would be served better.  The Committee also concurs with this line of thinking.  It, therefore, recommends that
out of the six members appointed to the Commission, at least two should be women.  A provision to this effect should be
inserted in the Bill.
Clause – 4
9.         The Committee notes that as per the Clause 4 of the Bill, the Chairperson and members of the Commission shall
be appointed by the Central Government.  However, appointment of the Chairperson shall be based on the
recommendation of a three member Selection Committee headed by the Minister of Human Resource Development.  The
Committee feels that this selection procedure might impinge upon the autonomy and independence required for
functioning of such a Commission.  It, therefore, is of the view that a National Commission of such a great significance
should be appointed by a higher/independent authority and certainly not by the government alone. The Committee notes
that the President of India is the appointing authority for the Chairman of the National Human Rights Commission and an
independent body having representation of high dignitaries as the Selection Committee for its members.  The Committee
strongly feels that similar provision be provided for the appointment of the Chairman and the members of the
Commission being set up for promotion of child welfare. The Committee therefore recommends that the existing Clause 4
of the Bill should be substituted by the following:-
(1)
               The Chairperson and other Members shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
 
Provided that every appointment under this sub-section shall be made after obtaining the recommendations of a
Committee consisting of:-
(a)    The Prime Minister – Chairperson
(b)   Speaker of the House of the People – Member
(c)    Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Human Resource Development in the Government of India –
Member
(d)   Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Social  Justice and Empowerment of the Government of India -
Member
(e)    Leader of the Opposition in the House of the People – Member
(f)     Leader of the opposition in the Council of States – Member
(g)    Deputy Chairman of the Council of States – Member
Clause – 5
10.       Clause 5(1) provides for the term of office of the Chairman and Members of the Commission.  The Committee
notes that there is no restriction on the number of terms the Chairman or the Member of the Commission can serve.  It
feels that a specific provision in this regard is required to be made.  The Committee is of the opinion that the Chairman
and Members should not be allowed to function for more than two terms.  The Committee, therefore, recommends to
insert a provision to this effect in Clause 5(1) of the Bill.
Clause 5(2)
11.1     Clause 5(2) provides that the Chairperson and Member may by writing under his hand addressed to Central
Government, resign his office at any time.  In view of the Committee's recommendations to make President of India their
appointing authority, consequential changes in clause 5(2) should also be made.
11.2     The Committee, therefore, recommends that in sub clause (2) of Clause (5) the words “Central Government” may
be replaced by “President of India”.
Clause-7(1)
12.1     Clause 7 provides for the removal of Chairperson or any other Member from his office by an order of the Central

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
Government on the ground of proved misbehavior or incapacity.
12.2     The Committee feels that the Chairperson and Members of the Commission may be removed only after a proper
enquiry.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the sub-clause (1) of clause 7 may be substituted by the following:-
Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the Chairperson or any other Member of the Commission shall
only be removed from his office by an order of the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or
incapacity after an inquiry held in accordance with the procedure prescribed in that behalf, reported that the
Chairperson or such other Member, as the case may be, ought on any such ground to be removed.
Clause 7(2)
13.       In clause 7(2) in line 23 of page 3 the words “Central Government” may be replaced by “President of India”.
Clause-8
14.1     The Committee notes that clause 8(2) of the Bill sets the procedure about the vacation of office by the Chairperson
or its members.  No specific time-limit has been prescribed for filling up of vacancies, if any.  This may create a situation
wherein the vacancies might remain unfilled for a long time which may affect the functioning of the Commission
adversely.
14.2     The Committee, therefore, recommends that if a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson or a
Member, whether by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled within 90 days in
accordance with the provisions of Clause 4.
Sub-clause (1) of Clause 10
15.1     Sub-clause (1) of clause 10 provides that the Commission shall meet at its office at least once in every six months.
15.2
          The Committee notes that in view of the heavy responsibilities and work-load of the Commission and the fact that
it has whole-time, regular and paid Chairperson/Members (barred from taking any other paid employment), it
would be required to meet at shorter intervals.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that sub clause (1) of
clause-10 may be substituted as follows:-
            “The Commission shall meet regularly at its office at such time as may be fixed by the Chairperson but in any case
at least once in three months”.
Sub-clause (4) of Clause 10
16.1     Sub-clause (4) of clause 10 provides that the Commission shall observe such rules of procedure for the transaction
of its business at a meeting including the quorum at such meeting, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
16.2     On being asked about the specific reasons for not empowering the Commission to lay down its own procedure, the
Committee was informed that where a Statutory Commission was headed by a person who is/has been a Supreme
Court/High Court Judge, the regulation of the procedure is left with the Commission.  This was primarily because they
would be aware of all such rules.  In contrast, where persons from other fields are appointed as Chairpersons, rules of the
procedure are framed by the administrative Ministry in consultation with Ministry of Law.  The Committee is not
convinced by the clarifications given by the Department.  It would like to point out that this is not so in the case of the
National Commission for Women.  Its Chairperson is of similar status as envisaged for the proposed Commission, yet it
has the power to regulate its own procedure.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that sub-clause (4) of clause 10
should also provide that the Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
COMMITTEES OF THE COMMISSION
Clause 10A
 
17.       The Committee observes that inspite of a huge mandate given to this six member body, it does not have the power
to appoint any Committee or any authority so as to facilitate its functioning as and when required.  The Committee's

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
attention was drawn towards by such a power given to the National Commission for Women.  On being asked about this
provision, the Committee was given to understand that the proposed Commission was empowered to take any action as it
might consider necessary for the promotion of child rights and any other matter incidental to the functions proposed for it
as per Clause 13 (i).  It was further informed that provision for Committees etc. can be provided in the Rules.  The
Committee, however, feels that such a provision needs to be enshrined in the Act itself.  The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that a new clause, a clause 10A may be added as follows:-
            "The Commission may appoint such committees, rapporteurs, amicus curie, as may be necessary for dealing with
such special issues as may be taken up by the Commission from time to time".
 
Clause 13
 
18.1     The Committee notices that a very crucial aspect - violation of child rights, does not occur anywhere in Clause 13
listing out functions of the Commission.  In other words, the Commission would have no power to inquire into child right
violations.  If it is so, the Committee feels, the Commission's powers shall remain highly truncated.  Besides, the Clause
15 (i) empowers the Commission to recommend initiation of proceedings in cases of violations of child rights.  The
Committee is at a loss to understand that if the Commission does not have an explicit power to go into violations of child
rights, how can it recommend such cases for action?  The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that going into violations
of child right should be expressly provided in Clause 13. 
18.2
          For this, the Committee recommends that the Clause 13 (c) and 13 (d) to be restructured as follows to make these
more harmonious and exhaustive.
(c)                examine all factors that violate and inhibit the enjoyment of rights of children and recommends appropriate
remedial measures.
(d)               look into the matters relating to children in need of special care and protection including children in distress,
marginalised and disadvantaged children, children in conflict with law, juveniles, children without family,
children of prisoners and also children affected by terrorism, communal violence, riots, natural disasters,
domestic violence, HIV/AIDS, trafficking, mal-treatment, torture and exploitation, pornography and
prostitution and recommends appropriate remedial measures.
18.3     The Committee also recommends to add “violation and” after “deprivation” in clause 13(i) (i)
Clause 14
 
19.1     In Clause 14, the Committee notices that there is no provision to deal with tendering of false or fabricated
evidence during inquiries under clauses 13 (i) and 14 (2), empowering the Commission to refer cases to the Magistrate of
jurisdiction under section of 346 of Criminal Procedure Code, covers only cases of contempt by way of intentional refusal
to produce a document, or to take oath, or to answer questions, or to sign the statement, or intentionally insulting or
obstructing proceedings by a public servant (punishable under sections 175, 178, 179, 180 and 228 respectively of the
Indian Penal Code).  It does not, the Committee feels, empower the Commission to refer cases of "giving or fabricating
false evidence" (punishable under Section 193 of the Indian Penal Code), which can be referred to a Magistrate of
jurisdiction under section 195 of the Criminal Procedure Code.  Even the term "all the powers of a civil court" used in
Clause 14 (1) does not empower the Commission to refer cases under section 195 of the Criminal Procedure Code as
under sub-section (3) of this section, a public servant/Tribunal has to be specifically "declared by the relevant Act to be a
Court for the purposes of this Section".  
 
19.2     The Committee is of the considered view that without these powers, as given in Section 13 of the National Human

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
Rights Act, the Child Rights Protection Commission would be greatly hampered in effective performance of its functions
relating to inquiries. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 14 of the Bill should be substituted by Section
13 of the Protection of Human Rights Act with suitable modifications, to include all the powers given to the National
Human Rights Commission under that Section as child rights are of same importance, if not more, as human rights.
 
INVESTIGATION
 
20.       In view of the Committee's recommendation about taking cognizance of violation of child rights and its inclusion
in Clause 13 of the Bill, the Committee feels the power of investigation would have to be necessarily given to the
Commission.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the following should be added as new Clauses 14A, 14B and
14C.
Clause  14 A
 
21.       (1)        The Commission may, for the purpose of conducting any investigation pertaining to the inquiry, utilize the
services of any officer or investigation agency of the Central Government or any State Government with the concurrence
of the Central Government  or the State Government, as the case may be.
(2)        For the purpose of investigating into any matter pertaining to the inquiry, any officer or agency whose services are
utilized  under  sub-section (1) may, subject to the direction and control of the Commission:-
(a)
          summon and enforce the attendance  of any person and examine him;
 
(b)         require the identification and production of any document;
 
(c)
          requisition any public record or copy thereof from any office.
 
(3)        The provision of section 14 B shall apply in relation to any statement made by a person before any officer or
agency whose  services are utilized under sub-section (1) as they apply in relation to any statement made by a person in
the course  of giving evidence  before the Commission.
(4)        The officer or agency  whose services  are utilized under sub-section (1) shall investigate into  any matter
pertaining to the inquiry and submit a report thereon to the Commission in this behalf.
(5)        The Commission shall satisfy itself about the correctness  of the facts stated and the conclusion, if any, arrived at
in the report submitted to it under sub-section (4) and  for this purpose the Commission may make such inquiry
(including  the examination of  investigation) as it thinks fit.
Clause  14 B
Statement made by persons to the Commission
            22.       No statement made by a person in the course of giving evidence before the Commission shall  subject him
to, or be used against him in, any civil or criminal proceeding except a prosecution for giving false evidence by such
statement:
Provided that the statement-
(a)    is made in reply to the question which he is required by the  Commission to answer; or
(b)   is relevant to the subject matter  of the inquiry.
Clause 14 C
 
23.       The Commission while inquiring into the complaints of violations of child rights may-
(i)      call for information or report from the Central Government or any State Government or any other authority or
organization subordinate thereto within such time as may be specified by it;
Provided  that-
 

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
(a)     if the information or report is not received within the time stipulated by the Commission, it may proceed
to inquire into the complaint on its own;
(b)     if, on receipt of information or report,  the Commission is satisfied either that no further  inquiry is
required or  that the required action has been initiated  or taken by the concerned Government or authority,
it may not proceed with the complaint and inform the complainant accordingly.
(ii)        without prejudice to anything contained in clause (i), if it considers necessary, having regard to the nature of the
complaint, initiate an inquiry.
Sub clause (2) of clause 16
 
24.       The Committee notes that in the present Bill no time limit has been provided for laying the Annual Reports or
Special Reports before the House of Parliament or the State Legislatures  as the case may be. The Committee  therefore,
recommends  that at the end of sub-clause (2) of clause 16 of the Bill (i.e., line 28, P. 6) the following may be added:-
 
            “ Within a period of one year from the date of receipt of such report from the Commission.”
STATE COMMISSIONS
 
25.1     The Committee, in view of its recommendations to amend provision of the Bill relating to constitution,
appointment, removal, etc. of the National Commission recommends that the corresponding provisions pertaining to the
State Commissions should also be amended accordingly.
25.2     Chapter IV deals with the constitution of State Commissions.  The Committee observes that as per Clause 17(i), it
is not mandatory for a State Government to set up State Commission.  The Committee is somewhat worried by the
experience with quite a few State Governments not fulfilling the provision of setting up of State Human Rights
Commissions and State Commissions for Women inspite of a provision being there in the respective Acts.  The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that it should be made mandatory for every State Government/UT Administration
to set up Child Rights Commission.
 
25.3     Provisions regarding State Commissions indicate that the State Commissions will be functioning independently. 
The Committee feels that there is a need for some kind of interface and co-ordination between State Commissions and
National Commission specially in view of the experience so far with regard to State Commissions of NHRC and NWC. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that such a provision could be made in the Rules.
 
25.4     The Committee observes that there are a number of Commissions/Boards such as National Commission for
Women, National Human Rights Commission, Juvenile Justice Boards, Child Welfare Boards and Central Social Welfare
Board, all of which are directly or indirectly involved in child welfare and also in the exercise of protecting their rights. 
With the enactment of the proposed Bill and State Commissions for child rights being set up, need for effective
coordination among these bodies so as to avoid any confusion/over-lapping will be increasingly felt.   The Committee has
been informed that a National Co-ordination Group having representatives from all concerned Ministries on children
issues has been set up.  The Committee hopes that this will prove to be an effective mechanism.
 
25.5     The Committee recommends that the Bill should have a provision at appropriate place to expressly prohibit State
Commissions to take up an issue, which is under consideration of the National Commission.
Clause 25
 
26.1     The omnibus provision under Clause 25 for trial of all "offences against children" or "violation of child rights" by

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
'Children's Courts' in Committee's view, would be difficult to implement and could lead to complications/conflicts in view
of the following factors:
(i)                  While offences committed against children or crimes in which children are the victims are considered as
'offences against children', there is no separate classification of such offences under the IPC and Criminal
procedure Code, which could be earmarked for trial by such courts. 
 
(ii)                In cases where the victims comprise both children as well as adults, there cannot be separate trials in two
different courts of the same offender(s) for the same offence.
 
(iii)   Offences in which the offenders are also juveniles are triable by Juvenile Justice Board under the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection) Act, 2000, and cannot be tried by Children's Courts under this Bill.
 
(iv)              All 'violations of child rights' may not amount to punishable offences triable by such courts.
 
26.2     In the light of the above observations the Committee feels that suitable amendments/additions should be made in
the Clause 25 with a view to ensure speedy trial of cases relating to Children.
 
Miscellaneous
 
27.       The Committee observes that human rights and child rights are integrated and inter related.  It would only be
appropriate if the two Commissions have some interface in their working at the higher levels.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Chairperson of the National Commission may be deemed to a Member of the National Human
Rights Commission.  The Department may take this up with the Ministry concerned for bringing an amendment to this
effect in the NHRC Act.
28.       The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any amendments.
 
29.       The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
 
30.       The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the amendment additions suggested
by it. 
 
32.
  The Committee would like the Department to submit a note with reasons on the recommendations/suggestions
made by the Committee, which could not be incorporated in the Bill.
 
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
XXVIII
TWENTY-EIGHTH MEETING
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 2.30 p.m. on Thursday, the 2 nd June 2005 in Committee
Room "A", Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
 
1.   Shrimati Chandra Kala Pandey-           In the Chair
2.   Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3.   Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
4.   Shri Uday Pratap Singh
5.   Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
6.   Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
 
LOK SABHA
 
7.   Shri Basudeb Barman
8.   Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
9.   Shri Ramswarup Koli
10.Shri Y.G. Mahajan
11.Dr. Thokchom Meinya
1. Mohd. Mukim
2. Shri Tukaram Ganpatrao Rengepatil
3. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
4. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
5. Shri A.R. Shaheen
6. Smt. Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
7. Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
 
      SECRETARIAT
 
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji  B., Committee Officer
 
 
WITNESSES
 
DEPARTMENT OF SECONDARY AND HIGHER EDUCATION
 
1.         Shri Sunil Kumar                      Joint Secretary
2.         Shri R.D. Sahay                        Deputy Secretary
            3.         Shri S.S. Mahlawat                   Under Secretary
 
2.         In the absence of Chairman, Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey  chaired the day's proceedings.
The Chairperson informed the Committee that the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok
Sabha has referred  ‘The Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Bill, 2005’ as introduced and pending in the Lok
Sabha, to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development for examination
and report within three months. The Committee decided to hear the Secretary, Department of Women and Child
Development on the Bill in its next meeting. 
3.         The Committee discussed the latest guidelines issued in respect of study visits by the  Parliamentary Committees.
The Members expressed their reservations and anguish over the wordings of the guidelines. The Committee decided not
to go ahead with its proposed visit to  Chandigarh, Srinagar and Leh.
4.         The Committee ,thereafter, took up clause-by clause consideration of the Manipur University Bill, 2005
alongwith the representatives of Department of Secondary and Higher Education. Members, then sought clarification on
several provisions of the Bill, to which the representatives of the Ministry replied. The Committee suggested the
following amendments/deletions in certain clauses of the Bill.
Clause 2(m)
The definitions for 'college' and 'institution' provided in 2(e) and 2(m) leave some scope for confusion,
particularly in view of different categories of colleges existing/likely to exist under the Manipur University.
Clause 9(3)

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
In Clause 9(3) in line 33 after the word "buildings," the word 'libraries' should also be added.
New clause for providing Chief Rector
            The following clause be added in the Bill after clause 9 and the entire clauses from 10 to 46 may be renumbered
accordingly:-
"10. The Governor of the State of Manipur shall be the Chief Rector of the University".
All the consequential changes may also be carried out in the Bill.
Clause 10
The Controller of Examinations may be added as an Officer of the University in Clause 10 of the Bill at Page 6. 
Clause 12(3)
In Clause 12(3), inline 8, the words 'at its next meeting' should be added after the word 'authority' Substitute the
word 'appeal' with 'representation' in line 12 of the second proviso to clause 12(3).
Clause 20 (1)
The Committee feels that the Court being the apex body of the university, provision for its constitution and term
of office of its, members be provided in the first statutes itself.
Clauses 21(2), 22(2), and 23(2)
The provisions for the constitution and term of office of the Executive Council, Academic Council and the
College Development Council, also be included within corpus of the first Statutes itself.
Clause 5(1) & (2) of the statutes
Clause 5(1) of the statutes, its two provisos and clause 5(2) may be deleted and the following may be substituted:-
            5(1) Every Dean of school shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor from amongst the Professors in the School
by rotation in the order of seniority for a period of three years;
            Provided that in case there is only one Professor or no Professor in a School, the Dean shall be appointed, for the
time being, from amongst the Professors, if any, and the Readers in the School by rotation in the order of seniority;
            Provided that the a Dean on attaining the age of sixty-two years shall cease to hold office as such;
            5(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause,
unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by the senior-most Professor or Reader,
as the case may be in the School.
Clause 6(3) of the Statutes
            In Proviso to clause 6(3) line 44 of the Statues, the words 'sixty years' should be substituted by 'sixty-two years'. 
Consequently, the 'sixty years' in the succeeding proviso should also be made as sixty-two years.
Clause 6(6) of the Statutes
            The words "and the College Development Council" at page 18, line 20 may be deleted from clause (6)(6).
Clause ((5) of the Statutes
In line 12 of page 20 (statute 9(5), the word 'twelve' may be substituted by 'eleven' or thirteen as the case may be.
Clause 16(1) of the Statutes
            The name college of Technology may be corrected as Manipur Institute of Technology.
Clause 19(1) of the Statutes
            In line 43 of Clause 19(1) of the statutes, the words 'or Reader' may be deleted and the word 'equivalent' may be
added after the word 'other'.  Also the words 'as the case may be' after the world 'University' be deleted.
Clause 35(1)(ii) of the Statutes
            In clause 35(1)(ii) of the statues the word 'undercharged' is a typing mistake and it should be substituted by the

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
word 'undischarged'.
Students Council
            The following may be added as statutes at an appropriate place:
            (1) There shall be constituted in the University, a Students' Council for every academic year, consisting of
-
 
(i)                  the Dean of Students' Welfare who shall be the Chairman of the Students' Council:
(ii)                all students who have won prizes in the previous  academic year in the field of studies, fine arts, sports
and extension work;
(iii)               twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis of merit in studies, sports,
activities and all-round development of personality;
 
Provided that any student of the University shall have the right to bring up any matter concerning the University
before the Students' Council if so permitted by the Chairman, and he shall have the right to participate in the discussions
at any meeting when the matter is taken up for consideration.
 
(2)        The functions of the Students' Council shall be to make suggestions to the appropriate authorities of the
University in regard to the programmes of studies, students' welfare and other matters of importance, in regard to the
working of the University in general and such suggestions shall be made on the basis of consensus of opinion.
(3)        The Students' Council shall meet at least once in an academic year preferably in the beginning of that year.
 
Alumni Association
 
            The following may be added in the statute:-
(1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.
            (3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he has been a
member of the Association for at least one year prior to the date of the election and is a degree holder of the University of
at least five year standing:
Provided that the condition relating to the completion on one year's membership shall not apply in the case of the first
election.
 
The Court
 
            Adequate provision be made in the Bill and the Statutes itself to ensure that the Court was not only
constituted without any interruptions, it also met at regular intervals.
 
5.         Thereafter the Committee took up the draft Report on the Manipur University Bill 2005 for consideration and
adopted the same with certain modifications.
6.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m. to meet again at 2.30 p.m. on Thursday, the 16
th  June 2005.
 
 
XXIX
TWENTY-NINTH MEETING
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.30 a.m. on Thursday, the 16th June 2005 in
Committee Room "A", Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS  PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Vayalar Ravi                      ¾        Chairman

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3.         Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
4.         Shrimati Chandra Kala Pandey
5.         Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
 
LOK SABHA
 
6.         Shri Basudeb Barman
7.         Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
8.         Shri R.L. Jalappa
9.         Shri Ramswarup Koli
10.       Shri Manjunath Kunnur
11.       Shri Y.G. Mahajan
12.       Dr. Thokchom Meinya
13.       Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
14.       Mohd. Mukim
15.       Shri Tukaram Ganpatrao Rengepatil
16.       Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
17.       Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
18.       Shri Tufani Saroj
19.       Smt. P. Satheedevi
20.       Smt. Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
 21.      Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri Swarabji  B., Committee Officer
 
WITNESSES
 
DEPARTMENT OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
 
1.         Smt. Reva Nayyar                    Secretary (WCD)
2.         Shri Chaman Kumar                 Joint Secretary
            3.         Smt. Laveleen Kacker              Joint Secretary
 
2.         The Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Women and Child Development on the Commissions for
Protection of Child Rights Bill 2005.  The Members sought several clarifications to which the Secretary and other
officials replied.  The Committee decided to hear the NGOs, experts and other agencies interested in the Bill.
3.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 12.15 p.m. to meet again on the 27
th June 2005.
 
XXX
THIRTIETH MEETING
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.30 a.m. on Monday, the 27th June 2005 in Main
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
MEMBERS  PRESENT
 
1. Shri Vayalar Ravi                      ¾        Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Eduardo Faleiro
3. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
4. Shrimati Chandra Kala Pandey
5.
      Shri S. Anbalagan
6. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
7. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
 
LOK SABHA
 
8. Shri Basudeb Barman
9. Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
10. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
11. Shri R. L. Jalappa
12. Shri Ramswarup Koli
13. Shri Manjunath Kunnur
14. Shri Y.G. Mahajan
15. Dr. Thokchom Meinya
16.  Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
17. Mohd. Mukim
18. Shri Tukaram Ganpatrao Rengepatil
19. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
20. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
21. Shri Tufani Saroj
22. Smt. P. Satheedevi
23. Shri A.R. Shaheen
24. Smt. Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
25. Shri K. Virupaxappa
26. Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji  B., Committee Officer
 
WITNESSES
 
Representatives of CRY
 
1. Ms. Bandana Datta, Regional Director                     
2. Vice Admiral (Retd.) H. Johnson, Advisor
 
Representatives of 
India Alliance for Child Rights
 
1.   Ms. Razia Ismail Abbasi, Co-Convenor                 
1.
      Ms. Bharti Ali, Charter Member    
                       
Representatives of Indian Council for Child Welfare

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
 
1. Smt. Gita Siddhartha, Secretary General      
2. Dr. Manmohan Kaur, Vice President
3. Smt. Aruna V. Kumar, Treasurer
4. Ms. Anuradha Bajaj                                                
5. Shri P.B. Majumdar
6. Smt. Saroj Tripathi
7. Shri Anil Srivastava
8. Shri Sudhir Wig
 
Representatives of 'PRAYAS'
1.     Shri Amod Kanth
2.     Shri Rajiv Haldar
3.     Shri R.M. Varma
 
2.         The Committee heard the representatives of CII, ASSOCHAM, PHDCCI & EPSI on problems/challenges before
University and Higher Education with special reference to the role of industry and commerce in supplementing the
efforts of the government in promoting higher education in the country.   Members sought clarifications, which were
replied.
3.         The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 1 PM and reassembled at 2.30 PM to hear the experts and representatives
of certain NGOs on the provisions of Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Bill 2005.  The members sought
clarifications on various provisions of the Bill, which were replied.
4.         The Committee decided to undertake its proposed visit to Srinagar and Leh  w.e.f. 14 to 19 July 2005. The
Committee authorized the Chairman to approach the Hon’ble Chairman to obtain permission for the visit of the
committee.
5.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 p.m. to meet again on the 6
th July, 2005.
 
XXXI
THIRTY FIRST MEETING
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 6 th July, 2005 in
Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS  PRESENT
 
1. Shri Vayalar Ravi                      ¾        Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
3. Shrimati Chandra Kala Pandey
4.      Shri S. Anbalagan
5. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
 
LOK SABHA
 
6. Shri Basudeb Barman

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
7. Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
8. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
9. Shri Ramswarup Koli
10. Shri Manjunath Kunnur
11. Shri Y.G. Mahajan
12. Shri Manoj Kumar
13. Dr. Thokchom Meinya
14.  Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
15. Mohd. Mukim
16. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
17. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
18. Smt. P. Satheedevi
19. Shri A.R. Shaheen
20. Smt. Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
21. Shri K. Virupaxappa
22. Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji  B., Committee Officer
Smt Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
 
WITNESSES
 
1. Shri Rajeev Awasthi, Advocate, Delhi High Court
2. Dr. Mohini Giri, Chairperson, Guild of Service and former Chairperson, National Commission for Women
3. Ms. Meera Khanna, Vice President, Guild of Service
4. Shri N.K. Shinghal (Former IPS), Expert on Juvenile Justice and Child Rights Issues
5.
      Ms. Aparna Bhat, Human Rights Law Network
6.      Ms. Aatreyee Sen, Human Rights Law Network
7.      Ms. Sampurna Behura, Human Rights Law Network
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the experts and representatives of the NGOs present and requested them to
express their views on the provisions of Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Bill 2005.  The witnesses made their
presentations and the members sought clarifications on various provisions of the Bill, which were replied.
3.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m.
XXXII
THIRTY -SECOND MEETING
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 4
th August 2005 in Room
No. 63, First  Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS  PRESENT
 
1. Shri Vayalar Ravi                      ¾        Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
2. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
3. Shri Basudeb Barman
4. Shri Ramswarup Koli
5. Shri Y.G. Mahajan
6. Dr. Thokchom Meinya
7.      Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
8. Mohd. Mukim
9. Shri Tukaram Ganpatrao Rengepatil
10. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
11. Shri Tufani Saroj
12. Smt. P. Satheedevi
13. Shri A.R. Shaheen
14. Smt. Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
15. Shri K. Virupaxappa
 
      SECRETARIAT
 
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji  B., Committee Officer
Smt Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
 
WITNESSES
 
Representatives of Department of Women & Child Development
 
            1.         Smt. Loveleen Kacker              Joint Secretary
            2.         Shri R.K. Ojha            Deputy Secretary
            3.         Shri J.S. Kochher                     Director, Social Justice &Empowerment
            4.         Shri Shahid Meezan                  Director, Ministry of Labour
 
2.         The Committee took up clause-by clause consideration of ‘The Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Bill,
2005’ alongwith the representatives of the Departments of Women and Child Development, Social Justice &
Empowerment and Ministry of Labour. Members then sought clarification on several provisions of the Bill, to which the
representatives of the Ministry replied. The Committee suggested the following amendments/deletions in certain clauses
of the Bill.
Clause 3
Out of the six members appointed to the Commission, at least two should be women.  The Committee
recommended that a provision to this effect should be inserted in the Bill.
Clause – 4
 
The existing Clause 4 of the Bill should be substituted by the following:-
(2)               The Chairperson and other Members shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
Provided that every appointment under this sub-section shall be made after obtaining the recommendations of a
Committee consisting of:-
(a)    The Prime Minister – Chairperson
(b)   Speaker of the House of the People – Member
    

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
(c) Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Human Resource Development in the Government of India –
Member
(d)   Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Social  Justice and Empowerment of the Government of India -
Member
(e)    Leader of the Opposition in the House of the People – Member
(f)     Leader of the opposition in the Council of States – Member
(g)    Deputy Chairman of the Council of States – Member
 
Clause – 5
  The Committee opined that the Chairman and Members should not be allowed to function for  more than two
terms and recommended to insert a provision to this effect in Clause 5(1) of the Bill .
Clause 5(2)
11.2     In sub clause (2) of Clause (5) the words “Central Government” may be replaced by “President of India”.
Clause-7(1)
            The sub-clause (1) of clause 7 may be substituted by the following:-
Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the Chairperson or any other Member of the Commission shall
only be removed from his office by an order of the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or
incapacity after an inquiry held in accordance with the procedure prescribed in that behalf, reported that the
Chairperson or such other Member, as the case may be, ought on any such ground to be removed.
Clause 7(2)
            In clause 7(2) in line 23 of page 3 the words “Central Government” may be replaced by “President of India”.
Clause-8
If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson or a Member, whether by reason of his death,
resignation or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled within 90 days in accordance with the provisions of Clause 4.
 
Sub-clause (1) of Clause 10
Sub clause (1) of clause-10 may be substituted as follows:-
         “The Commission shall meet regularly at its office at such time as may be fixed by the Chairperson but in
any case at least once in three months”.
 
Sub-clause (4) of Clause 10
 
Sub-clause (4) of clause 10 should also provide that the Commission shall have the power to regulate its own
procedure.
COMMITTEES OF THE COMMISSION
 
Clause 10A
 
  A new claue, clause 10A may be added as follows:-
            "The Commission may appoint such committees, rapporteurs, amicus curie, as may be necessary for dealing with
such special issues as may be taken up by the Commission from time to time".
Clause 13
Clause 13 (c) and 13 (d) to be restructured as follows to make these more harmonious and exhaustive.
(e)
                examine all factors that violate and inhibit the enjoyment of rights of children and recommends appropriate
remedial measures.
(f)                 look into the matters relating to children in need of special care and protection including children in distress,
marginalised and disadvantaged children, children in conflict with law, juveniles, children without family,
children of prisoners and also children affected by terrorism, communal violence, riots, natural disasters,

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
domestic violence, HIV/AIDS, trafficking, mal-treatment, torture and exploitation, pornography and
prostitution and recommends appropriate remedial measures.
Further in clause 13(i) (i)  add “violation and” after “deprivation”.
 
Clause 14
Clause 14 of the Bill should be substituted by Section 13 of the Protection of Human Rights Act with suitable
modifications, to include all the powers given to the National Human Rights Commission under that Section as child
rights are of same importance, if not more, as human rights.
INVESTIGATION
 
 The following should be added as new Clauses 14A, 14B and 14C.
Clause  14 A
 
(1)        The Commission may, for the purpose of conducting any investigation pertaining to the inquiry, utilize the
services of any officer or investigation agency of the Central Government or any State Government with the concurrence
of the Central Government  or the State Government, as the case may be.
(2)        For the purpose of investigating into any matter pertaining to the inquiry, any officer or agency whose services are
utilized  under  sub-section (1) may, subject to the direction and control of the Commission:-
(d)
                summon and enforce the attendance  of any person and examine him;
(e)                require the identification and production of any document;
(f)                  requisition any public record or copy thereof from any office.
(3)        The provision of section 14 B shall apply in relation to any statement made by a person before any officer or
agency whose  services are utilized under sub-section (1) as they apply in relation to any statement made by a person in
the course  of giving evidence  before the Commission.
(4)        The officer or agency  whose services  are utilized under sub-section (1) shall investigate into  any matter
pertaining to the inquiry and submit a report thereon to the Commission in this behalf.
(5)        The Commission shall satisfy itself about the correctness  of the facts stated and the conclusion, if any, arrived at
in the report submitted to it under sub-section (4) and  for this purpose the Commission may make such inquiry
(including  the examination of  investigation) as it thinks fit.
Clause  14 B
Statement made by persons to the Commission
            No statement made by a person in the course of giving evidence before the Commission shall  subject him to, or
be used against him in, any civil or criminal proceeding except a prosecution for giving false evidence by such statement:
Provided that the statement-
(c)    is made in reply to the question which he is required by the  Commission to answer; or
(d)   is relevant to the subject matter  of the inquiry.
Clause 14 C
The Commission while inquiring into the complaints of violations of child rights may-
(j)     call for information or report from the Central Government or any State Government or any other authority or
organization subordinate thereto within such time as may be specified by it;
Provided  that-
(c)
          if the information or report is not received within the time stipulated by the Commission, it may proceed to
inquire into the complaint on its own;
(d)         if, on receipt of information or report,  the Commission is satisfied either that no further  inquiry is required
or  that the required action has been initiated  or taken by the concerned Government or authority, it may not
proceed with the complaint and inform the complainant accordingly.
(ii)        without prejudice to anything contained in clause (i), if it considers necessary, having regard to the nature of the

165th Report of HRD Committee
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/165threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
complaint, initiate an inquiry.
Sub clause (2) of clause 16
At the end of sub-clause (2) of clause 16 of the Bill  the following may be added:-
            “ Within a period of one year from the date of receipt of such report from the Commission.”
STATE COMMISSIONS
The Committee in view of its recommendations to amend provision of the Bill relating to constitution,
appointment, removal, etc. of the National Commission recommends that the corresponding provisions pertaining to the
State Commissions should also be amended accordingly.
The Committee recommended that it should be made mandatory for every State Government/UT Administration
to set up Child Rights Commission.
The Committee feels that there is a need for some kind of interface and co-ordination between State Commissions
and National Commission specially in view of the experience so far with regard to State Commissions of NHRC and
NCW.  The Committee thus recommended that such a provision could be made in the Rules.
The Committee recommends that the Bill should have a provision at appropriate place to expressly prohibit State
Commissions to take up an issue, which is under consideration of the National Commission.
Clause 25
Suitable amendments/additions should be made in the Clause 25 with a view to ensure speedy trial of cases
relating to Children.
Miscellaneous
 
The Chairperson of the National Commission may be deemed to a Member of the National Human Rights
Commission.  The Department may take this up with the Ministry concerned for bringing an amendment to this effect in
the NHRC Act.
 
3.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 10.50 a.m.   
 
---------------------------------