PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 245
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON HUMAN  RESOURCE  DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FORTY-FIFTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2012-2013 (DEMAND NO. 105) OF
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)MAY, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)
RD  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 3 MAY, 2012)RD  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 3 MAY, 2012)
RD  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 3 MAY, 2012)RD  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 3 MAY, 2012)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FORTY-FIFTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2012-2013 (DEMAND NO. 105) OF
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 3 RD MAY , 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 3 RD MAY , 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY , 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................ (ii i)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—22
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ........................ 23—26
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 27—31

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
@3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri M. Rama Jois
$6. Shri Pramod Kureel
7. Shri N.K. Singh
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
10. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
12. Shri Kuvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
13. Shri Mirza Mehboob Beg
14. Shri Sameer Bhujbal
15. Shri P.K. Biju
16. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
17. Shri Suresh Channabasappa Angadi
18. Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar
19. Shri Rahul Gandhi
20. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
21. Capt. Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad
22. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
23. Kumari Saroj Pandey
24. Shri Prasanna Kumar Patasani
25. Shri Balakrishna Khanderao Shukla
26. Shri Ashok Tanwar
27. Shri Joseph Toppo
28. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
29. Shri P. Viswanathan
30. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
131. Shri Rathod Ramesh
(i)
@ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee  w.e.f.  2.4.2012.
$ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  2.4.2012.
1 Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  25.11.2011.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
do hereby present this Two Hundred Forty-fifth Report of the Committee on the Demands for
Grants (Demand No. 105) of Ministry of Yourth Affairs and Sports for the year 2012-2013.
2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and also heard the Secretary and other officials of that
Ministry on the said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 29
th March, 2012.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
30th April, 2012.
OSCAR FERNANDES
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
April 30, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary
Vaisakha 10, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports is entrusted with the responsibilities relating to the
development of Youth and Adolescents, and the functions of the Central Government with regard
to Sports and Physical Education. There are two separate Departments viz. Department of Youth
Affairs and Department of Sports.
1.2 The subject “Youth Affairs” is dealt in Department of Youth Affairs of the Ministry. As per
the initial figures of the 2011 Census, the current youth population in the country including
adolescents is around 550 million. It is indeed vital to utilize this “demographic dividend” and
channelize the Youth and their creative energies for nation building. The Department of Youth
Affairs is implementing a large number of schemes for youth and adolescents development which
focus on three key thrust areas viz., Personality Development, Preparation for Work Participation/
Employability and Empowerment. The programmes of the Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS)
focus towards rural youth and vast network of youth clubs and volunteers who undertake number
of activities for youth at the grassroot level. National Service Scheme (NSS) provides a platform
for students to enhance their personality through community service.
1.3 The Secretary in her presentation before the Committee on 29 March, 2011 gave an
overview of status of plan allocation and utilization thereof, both under the Youth Welfare and
Sports related programmes during 2011-12. For 2012-13, the first year of the Twelfth Plan, an
extensive exercise with regard to the roadmap for the entire plan period has been undertaken by
the Ministry. The Committee was informed that allocation for the year was based not on the
requirements projected by the Ministry, but on the resource position of the Government as a whole.
1.4 So far as Youth Sector was concerned, the primary focus was on making the Rajiv Gandhi
National Institute of Youth Development Bill, 2011 into a law and subsequent steps required to be
taken. Committee’s attention was drawn to the fund constraint being faced by the Nehru Yuva
Kendra Sangathan. Besides, 122 new Kendras to be set up, major proportion of funds under the
scheme was going towards existing commitment towards staff salaries and overheads. Financial
assistance at the RE stage was the only solution for restoring the issue. With regard to the National
Service Scheme, the other major scheme, the existing cumbersome funding pattern between the
Centre and the States needed to be simplified. It was proposed to reposition NSS on a pilot basis
whereunder skill development and skill building would be the central focus in partnership with the
National Skill Development Council.
1.5 ‘Sports for All’ and ‘Sports for Excellence’ were the corner-stone of all sports-related
programmes. The Committee was informed that in the last Sports Ministers’ Conference, a
resolution was unanimously passed, whereby sports and games were to be introduced compulsorily
through curriculum education in schools at all levels. For encouraging sports culture and broad-
basing of sports and games, one period each day had to be allocated for the purpose in all schools.
Adequate weightage was to be given to participation in sports-related activities by students.
Committee’s attention was also drawn to the provision of the RTE Act which stipulated 45 minutes
per day, one playfield and a full-time physical education teacher in all secondary schools. The
second initiative under the sports for All Programme was to have a National Physical Fitness Plan.
Under the Flagship Programme of Panchayat Yuva Krida and Khel Abhiyan, it was expected to
increase the coverage, improve the reach and enhance the participation of persons at rural level for
competitions from district to state levels.

2
1.6 Under the ‘Sports for Excellence’, all assistance was being provided to National Sports
Federations. Two institutions were proposed to be set up. One was the National Institute of Sports
Science and Medicine to be set up in the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium. To address the shortage of
coaches, the National Institute of Sports, Patiala was to be separated from the Sports Authority
of India so as to concentrate entirely on sports coaching. The Committee was informed that for
both of these institutions, additional funds would be required at the RE stage.
1.7 On a specific query about preparations for London Olympics, the Committee was informed
that sixteen ‘medal hope’ games had been identified, for which sportsperson had been very
carefully selected. Preparation and assistance therefor had been given on the same scale as in the
case of Commonwealth Games, with further upscaling in certain areas, such as lodging, nutrition/
scientific support and daily allowance.
1.8 Number of foreign coaches had also gone up. Funds amounting to `l00 crore had been
earmarked for the purpose. It was pointed out that specialized training even for one athlete was
being provided. Budget for London Olympics was `258.39 crore, out of which `111.19 crore had
been spent till 30 November, 2011.
1.9 The Department of Sports in the Ministry deals with “Sports”. The Government of India
has been supplementing the efforts of the State Governments through certain schemes of financial
assistance for sports Infrastructure. The Central Government directly and also through the Sports
Authority of India (SAI), which is a registered autonomous organization under the Department of
Sports provides financial assistance and a variety of facilities for competition exposure, training/
coaching etc to NSFs for preparation of teams for international events. SAI also has a number of
schemes for the spotting and nurturing of young talent. The Government of India had been
supplementing the efforts of the State Governments through certain schemes of financial assistance
for sports infrastructure. In addition, the Ministry is also implementing schemes for providing
incentives to sportspersons to encourage them to take up sports as a career.
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
2.1 The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports has been provided with a budgetary allocation of
`1152 crore in BE 2012-13 which includes `10411 crore as plan outlay and `1111 crore as non-
plan one. This shows only a marginal increase when compared with plan allocation of `1000 crore
for 2011-12. Non-plan allocation of `111 crore for 2012-13 is on a lesser side against provision
of `121 crore for 2011-12.
2.2 The Committee observes that while Youth related overall allocation remains unchanged in
2012-13, provision for sports-related activities has shown some enhancement. Scheme-wise
analysis indicates decrease in the allocation for NSS from `90 crore given in 2011-12 to `80 crore
provided for in 2012-13. The Committee finds a sharp decrease in allocation in some sports related
schemes as indicated below:–
(` in crores )
Scheme 201 1-12 2012-13
Scheme related to Talent Search and Training 10.00 0.50
Promotion of Sports among Disabled 5.50 0.00
Urban Sports Infrastructure 50.00 40.00
Not only this, the Committee is surprised to note that no funds have been provided for
National Welfare Fund for Sportspersons. The Committee finds no justification for

3
sportspersons’ welfare related schemes failing to get any assistance. Similarly, required
infrastructure is the most crucial component for sports promotion. Likewise, disabled
sportspersons need all kinds of encouragement, financial assistance being the most essential
one. The Committee would be commenting on these schemes in the Report.
2.3 Comparative analysis about the utilization status of allocated funds in respect of the
following schemes for the last three years show a somewhat discouraging trend:–
(` in crores )
Scheme 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual
NSS 86.00 63.64 76.00 74.00
National Youth Corps 3.00 2.43 52.25 45.98
Youth Hostels – – – – 5.00 0.78
National Programme – – – – 25.00 18.14
for Welfare and
Development of
Adolescents
Promotion of Sports 5.00 0.74 8.52 5.96 5.50 4.15
among Disabled
Lakshmibai 30.00 23.00 – – 30.00 22.50
National University
of Physical
Education, Gwalior
National Sports 14.25 8.12 – – 5.00 0.00
Development Fund
Panchayat Yuva 145.00 135.00 379.00 350.00 225.00 140.51
Krida aur Khel
Abhiyan
Urban Sports 4.00 0.00 93.00 15.00 50.00 20.62
Infrastructure
2.4 The Committee observes that all the abbve-mentioned schemes, specially those relating
to sports are very crucial for promotion of sports at the grassroot level. PYKKA was launched
in the second year and Urban Infrastructure Scheme in the next year of the Eleventh Plan.
Twelfth Plan has already started and both the Flagship Schemes are yet to cover the entire
country. The Committee would like to point out that before the commencement of a new
plan period, all those schemes lagging behind due to one reason or the other have to
be reviewed and inherent problem-areas identified followed by remedial steps. The
Committee would appreciate if immediate action is initiated in this regard without any
delay.
2.5 The Committee had the opportunity to go through the scheme-wise outlay for the Twelfth
Plan as recommended by the Working Group. It is somewhat disturbing to note that against the
proposed outlay of `2060.50 crore for 2012-13, the first year of the plan period, funds allocated
amount to only 1000.00 crore, less than half of the proposed outlay. The Committee observes that

4
substantive funds were proposed for very important new schemes. However, only a fraction of
envisaged provision has been made as indicated below:–
(` in crores )
Scheme Proposed Outlay Allocation
National Institute of Sports Science and 161.00 5.00
Sports Medicine
Upgradation of Sports Science and Sports 102.00 –
Medicine facilities at SAI centres
National Institute of Coaching Education, 160.00 1.00
Patiala Scheme of Preparation of Teams
for Mega Sporting Events
Opening of four new centres of LNUPE 100.00 5.00
and 5 new colleges of physical education
Not only this, there is a wide gap between the proposed outlay and the actual allocation for two
Flagship Schemes. Against the proposed outlay of `546.50 crore for PYKKA, an allocation of only
`235.00 crore has been made. Similar is the case with regard to Urban Sports Infrastructure.
Against the proposed outlay of `175.00 crore, allocation of only `40.00 crore has been made.
2.6 Committee’s attention has been drawn by very valuable recommendations made by the
Working Group for formulation of the Twelfth Plan. First recommendation relates to involvement
of NYKS volunteers in Panchayati Raj Institutions, for which 5 per cent funds of PRIs have been
kept aside for youth related programmes. Secondly, NYKS should involve the volunteers in
addressing and reaching out to the marginalized youth population like, street children, drug addicts,
unemployed youth, naxalite affected and border area youth with innovative and meaningful
programmes. NYKS had already entered into a MOU with other Government agencies like Ministry
of Rural Development, National Rural Health Mission, MGNREGA, NHRC etc. The Committee is
in full agreement with the Working Group recommendation for prompt steps required to be
taken for convergence of various youth schemes of other Ministries. The Committee hopes
that the Ministry will make every endeavour to fulfill very valuable recommendations made
by the Working Group.
2.7 The Committee strongly feels that all such ambitious schemes should not suffer from
fund constraints. This has to be reflected from the first year of the new Plan Period itself.
The Committee, accordingly, impresses upon the Ministry to take up its case of funds
enhancement with the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance in the right earnest.
At the same time, the Ministry should make every effort for better implementation of all
such schemes in co-ordination with all the implementing agencies.
III. NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)
3.1 Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) is an autonomous body of the Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports and has its presence in 501 districts of country. It has become one of the
largest Youth Organizations in the world reaching out to more than 42 lakh non-student rural
youth enrolled through over 1.25 lakh village based active Youth Clubs. These Youth Clubs work
in areas like education and training, awareness generation, skill development and self-employment,
entrepreneurial development, thrift and co-operation, besides development of the body through
sports and adventure and mind through sustained exposure to new ideas and development
strategies. For implementation of the programmes, every district Nehru Yuva Kendra has a

5
trained cadre of District Youth Co-ordinator, National Youth Corps (NYC) V olunteers and Youth
leaders.
3.2 The Committee observes that NYKS undertook various important programmes during the
year 2011-12. These programmes include Scheme of Mentor Youth Club, Youth Club Exchange
Programme (YCEP), Provision of Sports Materials to Youth Clubs, Work Camps, Skill up-gradation
Training Programme for Women (SUTP), Youth Employability Skill (YES) Project, Skill
Development Training Programme under NCVT Scheme, Block & District Folk Cultural Festival,
District/State Youth Awards (Individual), Celebration of National and International Days and Weeks,
Quarterly Meetings of District Advisory Committee on Youth Programme/State Advisory Committee
on Youth Programme (DACYP/SACYP), Documentation, Exhibition for Youth on Handicraft (Yuva
Kriti) and State Cultural Festival, Rajiv Gandhi Adventure Scheme and Need Based Special
Programme.
3.3 The Committee was informed by Ministry that the Youth Employability Skill (YES) Project
was launched on 4 April, 2011 in Imphal, Manipur on a pilot basis to impart training in employable
skills to unemployed youth. The Ministry started the YES project in collaboration with National Skill
Development Council and National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) in two districts of the
North East with 200 Youth V olunteers. The project was an unprecedented success with more than
150 of the Youth volunteers suitably employed across the country. While 1000 youth volunteers
across 58 districts of 8 states in the North East have been trained so far, the aim is to train 8000
youth during the coming year in the North East.
3.4 While appreciating the contribution made by NYKS in the implementation of various
Government programmes across the country for the development of youth, the Committee feels
that these activities need to be further strengthened. The Committee notes that there is general
lack of awareness regarding the multiple activities being carried out by the Nehru Yuva
Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
extensive and intensive publicity may be taken up at a higher scale so as to attract more
and more youth power towards NYKS programmes on a priority basis. Secondly, the
Committee would appreciate if more and more activities are planned exclusively for the
youth living in villages and rural areas to make them more suitable for their requirements
so as to encourage them to take benefit of the schemes for their betterment.
3.5 The Committee observed that the plan allocation for Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan for
2012-13 is `94.00 crore and there is no upward trend when compared with BE allocation of `93.00
crore. The Department informed the Committee that the demand for additional funds was made
while formulating the Revised Estimates (RE) for the year 2011-12 and the Budget Estimates (BE)
for the year 2012-13. The following heads of expenditure were taken into consideration for
working out the requirement of funds for NYKS:–
(i) Filling up of vacant posts (Youth Coordinator 322 posts and Accounts Clerk Typist 189
posts).
(ii) Prorata pension contribution for existing employees and NPS for next new recruits.
(iii) Recurring and non-recurring expenditure on establishment of 122 new Kendras.
(iv) Increase of budget for regular programmes and activities of NYKS to `16.85 lakh per
Kendra.
(v) Construction of office building of 60 Kendras at `l0 lakh per Kendra on the land to
be allotted by the State Government.
(vi) Construction of National Youth Centre at Alipur, Delhi.

6
(vii) Modernisation of information technology network in NYKS throughout the country.
(viii) Benefits under Modified Assured Career Progression Scheme (MACPS) `15 crores and
Assured Career Progression (ACP) Scheme is to Account Clerk Typists (ACTs) `13.30
crores.
3.6 The projection made by the Ministry in RE 2011-12 and Budget Estimates for the year
2012-13 was as under:–
(` in crores)
RE 2011-12 BE 2012-13
Plan Plan NE Non Plan Total Plan Plan NE Non Plan Total
99.08 15.10 32.50 146.68 336.81 29.85 52.69 419.35
3.7 Against the projection the fund allocation to NYKs for financial year 2012-13 has been made
as under:–
Plan – `94 crore
Non-Plan – `9.50 crore
North-East –` 11 crore
3.8 The Committee fails to understand the reasons for no increase in the plan allocation
for NYKS in 2012-13. As against the allocation of `93.90 crore under Plan, the expenditure
of NYKS as on 29 February, 2012 is `94.02 crore. There is thus total utilization of funds.
The Committee finds it hard to understand that against this backdrop, what are the reasons
for not increasing the allocation of funds in BE 2012-13 as demanded by the Ministry. The
projection made by the Ministry seems to be justified to a large extent as the requirement
is for expenditure on filling up of vacant posts and establishment of 122 new Kendras,
besides other expenditures. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Ministry to
make efforts for allocation of additional funds for expansion of NYKS. The Committee
would like to point out that before arriving at final figures of Plan Outlay, an analysis of
past record of utilization, capacity of the implementing agencies and the most important of
all, genuine requirement based both on implementation of the scheme in true spirit and
broad policy parameters is carried out.
3.9 The Committee has also a word of caution. Break-up of different Budget Heads
indicates that funds meant for regular programmes were less than half of the total
allocation for NYKS in 2011-12. Out of `99.08 crore, only `44.73 crore were spent towards
regular programmes. In contrast, funds amounting to `53.00 crore were meant for Salary
and Allowances `37.50 crore), other expenses on establishment `6.70 crore) and office
expenses of accommodation ( `8.80 crore). Position is set to aggravate further in 2012-13
with funds required amounting to `115.20 crore – salary component envisaged to be more
than doubled `80.98 crore), other expenses on establishment showing a three-fold increase
`19.00 crore) and office expenses of accommodation almost doubling `15.22 crore). The
Committee is of the view that trend of expenditure on this heads needs to be monitored
and rationalised accordingly.
3.10 At present, NYKs are functioning in 501 districts in the country. The Committee has been
informed that the proposal for expansion of NYKS to the remaining 122 districts of the country
has recently been approved. NYKS is in the process of preparing Annual Action Plan for 623
Kendras of NYKS including 122 new kendras which are being set up. A total of `37.72 crore is

7
required for opening of 122 new Kendras and conduct of programme/activity. These Kendras will
be functional during the Twelfth Plan Period (2012-17) in a phased manner on the availability of
the funds. The Committee is however disappointed to note that the expansion of NYKS in the
remaining 122 districts has not yet begun and Centres have not yet become functional. The
Committee has been voicing its concern over the unduly long time taken in having the
presence of NYKS in all the districts of the country. The Committee finds no justification
for such a prolonged process going on in a very crucial area of youth welfare. One plan
period is already over and nothing positive seems to be evident so far. Concerted efforts
with a logical conclusion have to be made.
3.11 The Committee is also dismayed to note that the 201 posts of District Youth Co-ordinators
(DYC’s) and 66 posts of ACTs are lying vacant and are being run through additional charges. The
Committee would like to point out that 323 posts of Youth Co-ordinator and 189 posts of Account
Clerk Typist lying vacant under NYKS are proposed to be filled up during 2012-13. In such a
situation, creation of required posts for the proposed Kendra is essential. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry expedite the recruitment of DYCs and ACTs so
that fresh recruitment takes place to fill up the vacancies. Filling up these posts should be
a priority area for NYKS to achieve its objectives. The Committee is not aware about the
status of proposal for sanction of required posts by the Ministry of Finance. If the proposal
has not materialized as yet, it is a cause of serious concern for the Committee. It would
be appropriate if the matter is taken up at the higher level. The Committee also
recommends that the Ministry of Finance needs to provide the adequate funds during the
Twelfth Plan Period (2012-2017) for expanding NYKS in the remaining 122 districts of the
country. One must not forget that youths residing in these uncovered 122 districts also
belong to the country.
3.12 The Committee was informed that the honorarium being paid to volunteers under NYKS is
very meagre ranging from `500/- to `2500/- and this request have been received from various
quarters for enhancing this to `5000/- and that this meagre amount is also effecting the efficiency
and efficacy of the various schemes/programmes. On a specific query the Committee was informed
that this have taken up the matter with the Planning Commission. The Committee also feels that
the amount of honorarium is very low and needs immediate enhancement and therefore direct the
Ministry and the Planning Commission to consider it positively and sympathetically.
IV. NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS)
4.1 National Service Scheme (NSS) is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) with the objective
to develop character and personality of student youth in schools and colleges. The Scheme is
implemented through the State Governments and the operations of NSS are at the University/College
and Higher Secondary School level. The objective of NSS is to arouse social conscience of students
and to provide them an opportunity to work with the people in the villages and slum dwellers. The
motto of the NSS “Not me but you” seeks to imbibe a spirit of volunteerism and community service
in the minds of young students. The scheme seeks to achieve its objectives through twin approach
i.e. “Campus to Community” and “college to village”, which also helps in developing leadership
qualities and personality development of students. The basic unit of NSS consists of 50 to 100
V olunteers at school/college level headed by a Programme Co-ordinator (usually a lecturer). At the
University level, the NSS is looked after by a Full Time or a Part Time Reader. The State Liaison
Cell at the State Secretariat is fully responsible for the implementation of the scheme including timely
release of Grants to the NSS Institutions. Under the “Regular Activities” programmes, students are
expected to work as volunteers for a continuous period of two years, rendering community service
for a minimum of 120 hours per annum. Under “Special Camping Programmes” a camp of 7 days
duration is conducted every year in an “adopted village” on a specific theme.

8
4.2 The Committee was informed that last year the camps were organized on the following
themes:–
(1) Environment including preservation of national resources and conservation of cultural/
historical heritage;
(2) Health, public sanitation and personal hygiene;
(3) Rural Development including project identification, programme formulation,
implementation and evolution;
(4) Education and literacy including legal awareness; and
(5) Emergency intervention including trauma care, initial counseling and data collection.
4.3 The Committee takes note of various activities and the involvement of NSS volunteers in
diverse activities focused on creating social awareness on various crucial issues of public interest.
A number of constructive endeavors were taken up by NSS in recent years in the field of Mass
Literacy, Environment Preservation, Health Education, Community Development, Disaster
Management, Adolescent Health Developments HIV/AIDS A wareness, Drive against Social Evils etc.
4.4 Today, NSS has more than 3.2 million student volunteers from 298 universities and 42
Senior Secondary Councils and Directorate of V ocational Education all over the country. From its
inception, more than 3.75 crore students have benefited from the NSS activities as student
volunteers. Under NSS 32 lakh volunteers have enrolled themselves in 15,109 colleges/technical
institutions and 8,174 senior secondary schools to carry out development activities in 26,202
villages/urban slums which have been adopted for this purpose. The Committee, however, is of
the view that the NSS could not keep pace with the desired expansion to Universities,
Colleges and +2 schools despite there being huge opportunity due to uneven distribution of
NSS volunteers across the North and South of the Country. Details of the universities and
colleges covered  presently under NSS also seen to indicate that professional colleges like
medical and engineering colleges which have shown a phenomenal growth over the recent
years have perhaps remained outside the purview of the scheme. If that be so, Committee
can conclude that a vast potential of our youth has remained devoid of positive impact of
NSS which has helped in creation of social awareness among college/university/students. Its
main objective is of nation building and national integrity and therefore it needs special
attention.
4.5 The Committee notes that during 2012-13, there is a proposal to include skill development
in NSS, so as to strengthen human resource capacity of the youth to make them employable,
thereby taking the growing problem of unemployment, youth unrest, violence and terrorism in Left
Wing Extremist (LWE) affected districts of Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and
NE States. As a pilot project, at least 1000 volunteers from these areas are proposed to be imparted
skill development training. The Committee welcomes this long awaited initiative which would
lead to secured and healthy atmosphere for the vulnerable youth in these areas. The
Committee impresses upon the Ministry to take every conceivable step in co-ordination with
the concerned State Governments so as to ensure success of this major initiative.
4.6 The Committee notes that funds allocated for the scheme during the last three years have
remained under-utilised. When asked to clarify specially with regard to 2011-12, the Committee was
informed that from 1.4.11 onwards, Planning Commission conveyed that Annual Plan allocation
should be released to States/UTs on the basis of Scheduled Caste Sub-Plan (SCSP), Tribal Sub-
Plan (TSP) and North Eastern/Others. As the enrolment of volunteers is on a voluntary basis and
NSS data is not segregated under SC/ST categories, there was confusion over the amount of funds

9
to be released to each State and UT. The clarification dated 10.2.2012 had now been received from
the Planning Commission with regard to the actual percentage of allocation of various categories
and releases to States/UTs would be smoother w.e.f. 1.4.2012 onwards. The Committee is not
happy at the unduly time taken in getting the matter resolved with the Planning
Commission. In the process, the scheme remaining deprived of required funds cannot be
justified.
4.7 The Committee takes note of the existing sharing pattern of expenditure between the Centre
and States. While for NE States/Hilly areas, the sharing ratio is 3:1, for UTs (without legislature)
and J&K, the Central share is 100% and for all other States it is 7:5. The Committee observes that
the Working Group for the Twelfth Plan had pointed out that some of the NE States showed their
inability to provide the matching share of grants as per the existing ratio of 3:1. The Working
Group had, accordingly, recommended that the existing matching share between the Centre and the
States might be considered for a revision to 9:1 for the NE States and from 7:5 to 3:1 ratio in
respect of other States. The other alternative suggested by the Working Group was that the Centre
could bear the entire expenditure for Special Camping Programme for NSS in States and the State
Governments could take care of the entire expenditure for Regular Activities to avoid the delay in
the release of grants to the units at the grassroot level. The Committee finds merit in both the
recommendations of the Working Group. The Committee would appreciate if a viable decision
in consultation with the State Governments/UT Administrations is taken at the earliest. It
should not happen that this Flagship Programme of the Ministry suffers adversely for want
of a decision.
V. NATIONAL DISCIPLINE SCHEME
5.1 The National Discipline Scheme was originally started in 1954 by the Ministry of
Rehabilitation with the aim of instilling and imparting training in mass drill among the younger
generation in the refugee camps and colonies. The Scheme was transferred to Ministry of
Education in 1958. Consequently upon the recommendation of Dr. Kunzru Committee in 1963, the
Discipline Programme was introduced at school stage, and the integrated scheme called National
Fitness Corps (NFC) was evolved.
5.2 In 1969, the Central Cabinet took a decision that employees under NFC would be
transferred to the services of the State Governments and in 1972 the National Discipline Scheme
was decentralized and initially 6145 NDSI were transferred and absorbed in the services of 21
State Governments/UT’s namely Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala,
Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, Assam, Karnataka, Chandigarh, Delhi,
Meghalaya, Tripura, Orissa, Jammu & Kashmir, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh on the
condition that the Central Government would reimburse their pay and allowances so long as they
remain in service. The Committee in its last Report had pointed out that why so much liability
has accrued even after the scheme was transferred to the States 38 years back. It was also very
surprising that all the 6145 NDS instructors have continued to remain in service for such a long
period. The Department has now informed that as per latest information collected form various
States/UTs, the number of NDSI is 4719. Due to limited budget provision under the scheme as
on date an amount of `245.09 crore is still outstanding as the committed liabilities of the Central
Government.
5.3 The Committee had sought information pertaining to quantum of committed liability released
so far, number of NDS instructors concerned thereunder, basis of outstanding committed liability
along with number of NDS instructors (State-wise). The Department has furnished the following
information:–

10
The details of NDSIs transferred/absorbed in States/UTs.
Sl. No. Name of the State No. of NDSI transferred
1. Andhra Pradesh 249
2. Assam 134
3. Bihar 78
4. Chandigarh 30
5. Delhi 370
6. Goa 10
7. Gujarat 420
8. Haryana 342
9. Himachal Pradesh 170
10. Jammu & Kashmir 126
11. Karnataka 136
12. Kerala 184
13. Madhya Pradesh 358
14. Maharashtra 1216
15. Meghalaya 11
16. Orissa 21
17. Punjab 604
18. Rajasthan 534
19. Tripura 12
20. Uttar Pradesh 802
21. West Bengal 338
T
OTAL 6145
State-wise position of National Discipline Scheme Instructors (NDSIs)
absorbed in various States Governments/UTs as on 29 th February 2012
Sl. No. Name of the State No. of NDSI transferred
1. Bihar 78
2. Gujarat 420
3. Haryana 342
4. Himachal Pradesh 170
5. Kerala 173
6. Madhya Pradesh 358
7. Maharashtra 1220
8. Punjab 604
9. Rajasthan  552
10. Uttar Pradesh  802
T
OTAL 4719

11
5.4 On the perusal of the above statement it is rather intriguing that the number of
instructors have remained static over so many years in States such as Bihar, Gujarat,
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, etc. and in Maharashtra and Rajasthan the number of
instructors have even increased. The Department was supposed to clear the dues as a one
time measure but as per the latest figures the number of NDS instructors is still 4719. The
Committee would like to know the complete details from the Department on the issue and
action plan to liquidate the entire liability in one go.
5.5 The one fact which has remained beyond the comprehension of the Committee is
continuance of such a large number of erstwhile instructors although now forty years have
elapsed since the transfer of the scheme in 1972. The Committee wonders whether there
is any retirement age for these instructors. If there is one, how can one continue beyond
forty years. The Committee is not aware whether this aspect has been taken note of by the
Ministry. It seems that the Ministry is simply relying on the details furnished by the
respective State Government. It is high time that this crucial aspect is examined and the
funding reviewed accordingly.
VI. YOUTH HOSTELS
6.1 Youth Hostels are built to promote travel and to enable the young people experience the rich
cultural heritage of the country. The construction of Youth Hostels is a joint venture of the Central
and State Governments. While the Central Government bears the cost of construction, the State
Governments provide fully developed land free of cost with water, electricity and approach roads.
Youth Hostels are located in areas of historical and cultural value, educational centre, tourist
importance etc. where facilities for youth activities are available. Youth Hostels provide good
accommodation for the youth at reasonable rates.
6.2 The Ministry informed the Committee that so far 81 Youth Hostels have been constructed
across the country and 4 more Youth Hostels are under various stages of construction. Out of the
81 Youth Hostels, 12 Hostels have been transferred to NYKS, SAI and the respective State
Governments for optimum use for Youth and Sports development. At present, 69 Youth Hostels are
functioning. The Ministry has also decided to select Managers for the Youth Hostels from retired
Defence personnel, preferably from the catchment area of the Youth Hostel and having command
over Hindi, English and local language. Under the new appointment policy, personnel retired from
Defence services in rank of Major/Lt. Col./Col. or equivalent are eligible for appointment as
Managers in Youth Hostels. The age limit for the appointment for the post between 35 years to
55 years will be affected from the date of contract. The appointment will be fully on a contract
basis for an initial period of 3 years which is extendable on the basics of performance of the
Manager but in no case beyond the age of 62 years.
6.3 Four Youth Hostels located at Kadapa (Andhra Pradesh), Roing (Arunachal Pradesh),
Churchandpur and Thoubal (Manipur) are at advanced stages of construction and the two Youth
Hostels at Churchandpur and Thoubal (Manipur) are likely to be completed during the end of the
current financial year.
6.4 The Ministry has shared the following difficulties/constraints being faced in the running of
Youth Hostels:–
(i) Poor management
(ii) Poor maintenance
(iii) Poor location of some Youth Hostels
(iv) Shortage of Manpower

12
(v) Lack of funds and poor revenue of hostels
(vi) Poor occupancy of youth hostels.
The Department also informed the Committee that even after repeated reminders to the State
Government of Arunachal Pradesh it has not provided any land for construction of Youth Hostels
and therefore the funds have not been released.
6.5 The Department also informed the Committee that an amount of `1.5 crore has been
released during the current financial year 2011-12 for undertaking immediate facelifting of 21 youth
Hostels. On the declining trend from `4.5 crore in BE 2011-12 to `2.00 crore at RE 2011-12 and
only `1.8 crore for BE 2012-13, the Department informed that on the advice of the Planning
Commission, no new Youth Hostels have been sanctioned during the Eleventh Plan. The Planning
Commission has allocated only `12.00 crore in the Eleventh Plan for completion of ongoing
projects of Youth Hostels. For this reason, the cut has been imposed in the Current Financial Year
from `4.5 crore to `2.00 crore.
6.6 The Committee believes that the advice given by the Planning Commission for not
sanctioning new Youth Hostels should be taken in positive spirit by the Ministry in the sense
that it should consolidate its activities as regards existing Y outh Hostels is concerned. The
Committee also feels that the Ministry has not been able to complete the existing projects
and these were getting delayed due to lack of proper coordination with the State
Governments, besides other reasons. The maintenance of Hostels was also not very
encouraging and even some Hostels were functioning without caretakers. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should concentrate on completion of construction of Hostels,
upkeeping of the Hostels, their facelifting work and the appointment of Managers etc. so that
the purpose of building Y outh Hostels is not defeated. The Committee further recommends
that after the completion of all the projects/works in this regard, the Department then submit
new plans for the construction of new hostels and demand more funds for the purpose.
VII. SCOUTING AND GUIDING
7.1 The Scheme of Scouting and Guiding was launched in the early 1980s to promote the
Scouts and Guides movement in the country. This is an international movement aimed at building
character, confidence, idealism and spirit of patriotism and service among young boys and girls.
The Bharat Scouts and Guides is the largest volunteer based, non-political, educational movement
in the country open to all without distinction of origin, race or creed. The organization has a
network of branches covering all States in the country.
7.2 The Committee notes that the scheme has not been facing any fund constraint. Rather,
allocation made every year has remained under-utilised. Keeping this trend in view, provision of
`1.50 crore has been made for 2012-13 against an allocation of `2.00 crore in 2011-12.
7.3 The Committee finds that the Working Group for the Twelfth Plan has recommended the
merger of the Scouting and Guiding Movement with the existing National Programme for Youth and
Adolescent Development. It has also been recommended that an Impact Assessment Study of the
Bharat Scouts and Guides under the Central Scheme of Scouting and Guiding be done by an
independent institution. The Committee is of the view that both the recommendations are
worth consideration and implementation and the Ministry should take the required steps in
this direction.
VIII. RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT
8.1 Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development, an autonomous body registered as a

13
Society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, was set up in March, 1993 with the mandate
to undertake advanced study and applied research in the field of youth related activities. The
Institute is functioning in a sprawling complex of 42 acres at Sriperumbudur about 40 Km. from
Chennai, Tamil Nadu and is fully funded by the Government of India. As an apex organization of
national level, the Institute is an action forum to carry out the following functions:–
(i) to design, develop and conduct appropriate training and orientation programmes;
(ii) to sponsor, promote, conduct research evaluations and programme development
projects;
(iii) to work as an advanced centre and apex body for all the identified training, orientation
and research centers on youth, sponsored and aided by the Ministry of Youth Affairs
and Sports;
(iv) to help in the orientation and upgradation of professional skills of the youth
functionaries of the Central and. State Governments/Union Territories, Universities,
NGOs working in the filed of youth;
(v) to bring out publications and to undertake documentation and dissemination of
information; and
(vi) to take up extension projects/services on experimental basis.
8.2 The Institute now has the following 5 divisions namely (i) Training, Orientation and
Extension Division (ii) Research, Evaluation and Documentation/Dissemination Division (iii)
Panchayati Raj and Youth Affairs Division (iv) International Centre for Excellence in Youth
Development Division and (v) Social Harmony and National Unity Division. The RGNIYD was
declared as a University in 2008.
8.3 The RGNIYD will become a landmark in formulation of policies for youth of our country.
It is now proposed to make this institute an institution of national process. The process has already
started therefor. As the apex national agency for youth development the Institute shall develop into
a globally recognized centre of academic and professional excellence in  the yield of youth
development. The Committee hopes that the process would be expedited and the institute
would start working towards its cherished goals, for the upliftment of our youth power.
IX. NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR YOUTH AND ADOLESCENT DEVELOPMENT (NPYAD)
9.1 The Programme was formulated by merger of four 100 per cent central sector grants-in-
aid schemes of Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, namely, Promotion of Youth Activities &
Training, Promotion of National Integration, Promotion of Adventure and Development and
Empowerment of Adolescents with a view to reduce multiplicity of schemes with similar objectives
ensuring uniformity in funding pattern and implementation mechanism avoiding delays in availability
of funds to organization at the field level and institutionalizing participation of State Governments
in project formulation and its implementation.
9.2 The scheme is being implemented in the project mode through Project Implementing
Agencies (PIAs). The PIA may submit project proposal involving one or more programme area of
components under the scheme but the key factor for consideration of the project will be the past
experience and resource available with PIA. The proposals are placed before a duly constituted
Project Appraisal Committee (PAC) in the Department under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Youth
Affairs) for taking a decision thereon. The targeted beneficiaries of the programmes are youth and
adolescents under a youth network recognized by the State or Central Government. They include
members of youth clubs affiliated to Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan or State Governments, NSS

14
units, or student youth in schools, colleges and Universities and preference is given to youth with
special abilities and youth belonging to scheduled caste, scheduled tribes and other weaker sections.
9.3 National Youth Festival, Tenzing Norgay National Adventure Award and National Youth
Award are also part of the NPYAD Scheme. National Youth Festival is organized in a State, which
is willing to hold it and which has infrastructure facilities to do so. The Department provides a
financial assistance not exceeding `200 lakhs to the State willing to hold the festival. Till date 17
National Youth Festival have already been held.
9.4 The Committee on a perusal of utilisation figure under the programme finds that
though expenditure incurred under the NPYAD scheme upto 29.2.2012 is 87 per cent of the
allocation but at the same time 61 per cent has been spent in Delhi only, 13 per cent in
Karnataka and less than 10 per cent in other States. The Committee feels that a uniform
trend should be followed in utilising the funds to ensure an all round development.
9.5 The Committee observes that this is an umbrella scheme which has the components of
Youth Leadership and Personality Development, Promotion of National Integration, National Youth
Award, Promotion of Adventure, Development and Empowerment of Adolescents and Technical and
Resource Development. The Committee notes that the existing scheme is proposed to be modified
during the Twelfth Plan. The Scheme will be renamed as the Programme for Youth Development
and have the components of Youth Development and Youth Exchange Programme and Promotion
of Adventure Sports (non-competitive). Special emphasis will be laid on the developments of female
adolescents during the Twelfth Plan. It is also proposed to enhance the cost norms for various
activities under the Programme. The Committee welcomes the proposal for restructuring of the
scheme with special focus on female adolescents. The Committee would appreciate if this
process is expedited and the recast scheme is made operational in the first year of the
Twelfth Plan period only.
X. PANCHAYAT YUV A KRIDA AUR KHEL ABHIYAN (PYKKA)
10.1 Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA) launched in 2008-09, aims to provide
basic sports infrastructure to all village and block panchayats of the country over a period of 10
years. The Scheme envisages creation of playfields with basic facilities at panchayats and block
levels, recruitment and training of community coaches (kridashrees), sports competitions at Block,
Districts, State and National levels. The total requirement of funds for the entire programme over
the 11
th & 12 th Plan Periods has been estimated at approximately `4500 crores.
10.2 Under the scheme, village/block panchayats receive a one-time seed capital grant of `1 lakh/
`5 lakh each for establishing a playing field with basic facilities. The State share in this is 25 per
cent for all states except for special category states where it is 10 per cent. In addition, village
panchayats are given annual acquisition grant for procurement of sports equipment and annual
operational grant to meet the operational expenses of non-competition nature @ `10,000 and
`12,000 per annum respectively and block panchayats are @ `20,000 and `24,000 respectively.
10.3 The Committee notes that during the year 2011-12, an allocation of `225 crore was
provided for 2011-12 at BE stage which was reduced to `165.20 crore at RE stage. The scheme
has been under-funded and physical targets have not been met. The Committee observes that so
far 50140 village panchayats and 1493 block panchayats belonging to 31 States/UTs have been
covered under PYKKA during the last four years of implementation of the scheme since 2008-09.
During 2011-12, funds to the tune of `135.53 crore have been released to the States/UTs out of
which `105.68 crore is for creation of sports facilities and `29.85 crore for holding annual sports
competitions. 7.22 lakh, 22.49 lakh and 43 lakh rural men and women took part in the annual
sports competition held during 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11. Further the Department informed

15
that around 1016 officials from the States have been trained under two weeks’ ‘Master Training
Course’ being organized at Lakshmibai National University of Physical Education, Gwalior. Further,
more than 24,000 community coaches called ‘kridashrees’ have also been trained under one week
training course being organised at the States/UTs.
10.4 The Committee was further informed that PYKKA is the flagship programme of the Ministry
and that they would increase its coverage, improve its reach and enhance the participation of
persons at rural level and that the results have so far been extremely encouraging. The programme
has proved to be of great deal of encouragement from the States themselves.
10.5 The plan allocation of `105.00 crore in BE 2011-12 was brought down to the `53.00 crore
at the RE stage 2011-12. It was clarified by the Department that the reduction of funds for PYKKA
at RE stage was on account of adjusting the budgetary cut of `116.00 crore in the allocation of
the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports at RE Stage. The Committee is not happy with the
reductions in budgetary provisions for such an ambitious programme which involves
development of sports infrastructure at the grassroot level for the marginalized section of
the society. On a specific query regarding the funding of schemes through MPLAD funds,
the Committee was  informed that it has been approved and circular in this regard has been
issued by  the Ministry. The Committee welcomes the initiative for funding of the scheme
through MPLAD.  It is for the Ministry to make optimum use of such an opportunity. The
Committee also has a word of caution for the implementing agencies. The Ministry has to
exhibit extra level of commitment and vigour in the achievement of targets through mission
mode so that the shortfall so far noticed in the delivery of performance is bridged
effectively. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would adopt a proactive and pragmatic
approach for better performance during the Twelfth Plan period.
10.6 The Committee has made an attempt to analyse the progress made so far under two major
components of the scheme. They are creation of playfields with basic facilities at panchayat and
block levels and training of community coaches (Kridashrees). The Committee notes that from
2008-09 to 2010-11 (reported as on 29.02.2012), funds amounting to `568.97 crore have been
released to various States. However, utilization status is quite discouraging with only `241.10 crore
spent so far. Position is self-revealing in respect of the following States:–
(` in crore )
State Funds released for development for playfields Utilised
Andhra Pradesh 77.94 51.96
Arunachal Pradesh 14.95 5.56
Gujarat 23.08 9.65
Haryana 20.94 10.75
Himachal Pradesh 16.48 9.54
Kerala 12.77 0.8
Madhya Pradesh 47.29 11.82
Maharashtra 55.71 8.91
Punjab 39.20 6.27
UP 107.62 53.90
Uttarakhand 28.32 8.90

16
Besides that no money has been spent by States like Assam, Bihar, Chattisgarh, Goa and Tamil
Nadu inspite of funds being duly released to them.
10.7 Under the second component of the scheme 25,228 Kridashrees have been trained under
one week training course and funds spent are `4.64 crore. State-wise utilization status and the
number of Kridashrees trained indicate varying figures. It seems that no fixed rates have been laid
down for the one week training as indicated below:–
(` in lakhs )
State No. of Kridashrees trained Amount
Assam 355 5.43
Jharkhand 396 15.93
Mizoram 296 8.49
Nagaland 345 6.95
Tripura 324 6.75
Goa 23 1.39
Kerala 87 1.92
Manipur 83 1.40
Puducherry 72 1.46
Andhra Pradesh 2323 32.21
Punjab 2227 38.35
Maharashtra 2054 38.47
10.8 The Committee feels deeply concerned with the States’ inability to have the
maximum benefit from the scheme. The Committee is not aware whether any norms have
been laid down for development of playfields and training expenses per coach. If such
specification has already been made, then the same needs to be enforced judiciously. If not,
the Committee would appreciate if norms for every conceivable component are laid down.
XI. URBAN SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE SCHEME
11.1 A central sector scheme titled Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme has been introduced in
2010-11 with a view to addressing the entire “sports eco-system” holistically i.e.  players
academies, coaching and infrastructure/hockey turf/football turf/multipurpose halls/ athletic track.
The Scheme envisages development of playfields by the State Governments through playfield
associations, coach training programme through Central and State Governments, setting up of
players academies where SAI centres will provide the nucleus of a hub and spoke model for such
academics catering to premier sports in each State.
11.2 The Scheme will focus on promoting and supporting a mechanism at national and State
level to encourage, assist and preserve community playfields incentivizing utilization of
infrastructure already available in the State at all levels by filling up critical gaps, creating need-
based infrastructure and creating capacity building among coaches including community coaches.
Under the scheme, State Governments, local civic bodies, schools, colleges, universities and sports
control boards are eligible for assistance. The sports infrastructure project for which the grant is

17
provided under the scheme is meant for (i) synthetic Athletic track, (ii) synthetic Hockey field/
surface, (iii) synthetic Football turf; and (iv) Multipurpose Indoor Hall. Normally, it takes one to
two years for completion of these projects and thereafter these sports facilities are made available
for the community and sportspersons for training and competitions/tournaments.
11.3 The Committee took note that the allocation of `15 crore was made during 2010-11,
`350.00 was made in BE 2011-12 which was reduced to `25.50 crores at RE Stage. During 2010-
11, the Department released funds for 4 projects viz., Synthetic Hockey field at India Stadium, Una
(Himachal Pradesh), Multipurpose Indoor Hall at Taran Taran (Punjab), Renovation/modification and
modernization of Indoor Sports Complex (Khudiram Anushilan) Eden Gardens, Kolkata (West
Bengal) and an Astroturf for Hockey at Aizwal (Mizoram). During 2011-12 the Department has till
31
st December, 2011 released funds for 5 projects viz. Synthetic Hockey surface, Kalinga Stadium,
Bhubhneshwar (Odisha), Synthetic Track, Indira Gandhi Stadium, Kohima (Nagaland), Multipurpose
Indoor Hall, Mualpui Aizwal (Mizoram), Multi purpose Hall Ummed Stadium, Jodhpur (Rajasthan)
and Synthetic Hockey field, Ranital Sports Complex, Jabalpur (Madhya Pradesh).
11.4 The Committee is happy to note that the scheme has been approved and funds have
been released for some projects. The Committee, however, feels that since this is the initial
state of formulation of policy for development of sports infrastructure, it should also take
into account the needs at block and district level. A large sports infrastructure for the city
may not be accessible to majority of the users or sportspersons but the effort should be to
build practice stadium conferring to the needs of a smaller group. The Committee cautious
the Ministry on the monitoring of the projects, its timely completion and proper utilization
of funds.
XII. PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
12.1 The Ministry has formulated a scheme for promotion of sports and games among disabled
during 2009. The objective of the scheme is broad-basing participative sports among the disabled.
The Scheme of Sports and Games for the Disabled has the following components:–
(a) Grant for sports coaching and purchase of consumable and non-consumable sports
equipment for schools.
(b) Grant for Training of coaches.
(c) Grant for holding District, State & National level competitions for the disabled.
12.2 The Committee was informed, that during 2010-11 and 2011-12, grants to 98 schools were
provided under the scheme till 31 December, 2011. Further funds to the tune of `3.00 crore were
provided to special Olympics Bharat, designated as the Nodal Agency for conduct of training of
community coaches and sports competitions at district, State and National level. 22,500 persons
with disabilities participated in competitions conducted at district and state levels and 4500
community coaches were given training till 31
st December, 2011.
12.3 The Committee is aware that Para Olympics are held alongwith the Olympics at
international level. The amount of budgetary allocation to the scheme is not very
encouraging and not in any way assures that our para sportspersons will be benefited fully.
There is a need not only for coaches, sports equipment, but also sports infrastructure
especially for the disabled sports persons and the creation of an environment which is
friendly to such persons. The Committee is not aware whether any monitoring mechanism
is in place so as to ensure that this marginalized section of our society is in a position to
get full support of the scheme. The Committee would be happy if the Ministry takes an
initiative in this regard.

18
XIII. SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
13.1 The Sports Authority of India (SAI) was set up in 1984 as a registered Society. SAI is
engaged in spotting and nurturing talent at all levels by providing the requisite infrastructure and
equipment, coaching facilities, scientific back up, nutritious diet, and competition exposure. It is
also entrusted with the responsibility of maintaining and utilizing, on behalf of Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports, the five Stadia in Delhi which were constructed/renovated for the IX Asian
Games held in New Delhi in 1982. During 2009-10 and 2010-11, all five stadia of SIA were
renovated and handed over to Organising Committee of Commonwealth Games 2010 for conduct
of the Games.
13.2 The Committee is happy to note that the five stadia complex at New Delhi having state of
art facilities for various games have been put to good use by various organizations including Sports
Federations and national/international level sportspersons. The Committee has also been given to
understand that training is also being imparted to children under the scheme of ‘come and play’
at various SAI stadia complexes in New Delhi and SAI centres across the country. The Committee
would like to have state-wise details in this regard.
13.3 There are 7 Regional Centres of SAI, which are located at Bangalore, Gandhinagar,
Chandigarh, Kolkata, Imphal, Bhopal and Sonepat. In addition, through the Netaji Subhash National
Institute of Sports (NIS, Patiala), the academic arm of SAI, offers a variety of courses in sports
coaching and sports medicine; and graduate and post-graduate courses in physical education are
offered at the Lakshmibai National College of Physical Education (LNCPE), Thiruvananthapuram.
There are a total of around 3000 employees in SAI including around 1200 coaches deployed all
over the country.
Brief of SAI Schemes
13.4 A brief outline of schemes implemented by SAI for spotting and nurturing of sports talent
and the promotion of sports in the country is as under:–
(a) National Sports Talent Competition (NSTC):  The main objective of the scheme is
to identify gifted and talented sportspersons among school children in the age group
of 8-14 years.
(b) Army Boys Sports Companies (ABSC): is implemented in collaboration with the
Army, children in the age group of 8-14 years are imparted with scientific training to
achieve excellence at national and international levels. The scheme also provides job
opportunities in the Indian Army. Similar arrangements are proposed to be entered into
with Centre Para-military forces.
(c) Special Area Games (SAG): This Scheme follows an area-specific approach to scout
and nurture talent for modem competitive games and sports from tribal, rural, coastal
and hilly areas of the country. The main objective of the scheme is to train talented
and meritorious sportspersons in the age group of 14-21 years.
(d) SAI Training Centres (STC): Under this scheme, talented youth in the age group of
14-21 years are given the option to join the scheme on residential or non-residential
basis.
(e) Centres of Excellence (COX): the main objective of this scheme is to identify and
train outstanding sportspersons who are medal prospects for the country in
international competitions.
13.5 In addition, SAI, through its Training of Elite Atheletes and Management Support
(TEAMS) Division provides support of NSFs by way of coordinating their Long Term Development

19
Plans (LTDPs), and providing logistical and training support. In this role, a number of activities
are being carried-out by SAI out of funds provided to them by the Ministry.
13.6 Lakshmibai National University of Physical Education (LNUPE), Gwalior: the Institute has
been running Graduate, Post-Graduate and Doctoral Degree Courses in Physical Education. The
North East Regional Centre of LNUPE has also come into existence and started its operation form
Guwahati from the academic session 2010-11.
13.7 T he Committee has noted that the utilisation of funds is satisfactory. It has also
noted that NER campus of LNUPE has started functioning from 2010-11 from Guwahati. It
is an encouraging scenario. The Committee is of the firm view that many more campuses
should be set up in other regions of the country, especially in the remote and tribal areas
where sports talent is abundant in the youth. The Department should identify the regions
where there is concentration of sportspersons and set up more campuses.
13.8 The Ministry has also informed the Committee that it has been decided to de- merge the
NIS, Patiala from the Sports Authority of India for setting up of National Institute of Coaching
Education. The objective behind the setting up of this independent coaching institution is that since
the availability of qualified coaches is critical for promotion of sports excellence, there is a need
for producing quality coaches of international standards within the country and develop a holistic
system for imparting coaching.
13.9 The Committee is aware of the perennial problem of acute shortage of coaches in the
country. SAI has not been able to tackle this problem due to the lack of proper guidelines
or policy. It is expected that this new institution will emerge as an institution of excellence
and help not only in eliminating the shortage of coaches but develop coaches of
international standard. Coaching is the backbone and the basic strength behind excellent
performance in sports. Once this institution starts churning out good coaches, performance
of our sportspersons will automatically  improve. The Committee strongly advocates a strong
coaching institution and hopes it should not suffer form low allocation of funds or under
utilization of funds.
XIV. LONDON OLYMPICS 2012
14.1 The London Olympics 2012 are scheduled to be held from 27 July, 2012 to 13 August,
2012 at London in 26 sports disciplines. The Ministry informed the Committee that with a view
to prepare athletes and teams for this international event, the Government has launched Project
‘Operation Excellence for London Olympics 2012’ (OPEX 2012) under which Core probables have
been identified and are also being provided comprehensive and intensive training, both within the
country and abroad as well as competition exposure in International Sports competitions. Funds for
preparation of athletes for London Olympics are being provided at norms, which are at par with
scales for Commonwealth Games 2010, with further upscaling in certain areas, such as lodging,
nutrition, scientific support and daily allowance. The budget for OPEX London 2012 is pegged at
`258.39 crore of which `111.19 crore, have been spent till November 30,2011. While `64.10 crore
has been spent on foreign exposure of athletes in different disciplines, `46.09 crore has been spent
on their coaching camps and coaches. Project OPEX 2012 is being funded under the scheme of
Assistance to National Sports Federations, supplemented by National Sports Development Fund.
14.2 The coaching/training and International Competitions/Exposures requirements of athletes and
teams have been finalized in consultation with the concerned National Sports Federations, Sports
Authority of India and experts from the respective fields of sports. The Ministry is closely
monitoring the preparations and is in continuous interaction with concerned National Sports
Federations, Sports Authority of India and other experts to review the preparations. Two High Level

20
Committees i.e., the Apex Committee headed by the Minister of State (Independent Charge) for
Youth Affairs and Sports and the Steering Committee headed by Secretary (Sports) have been
formed to finalise and review/monitor the action plans for preparation of sportspersons for London
Olympics 2012.
14.3 Out of 16 sports disciplines identified for preparation of London Olympics 2012, individual
sportspersons in the disciplines of Gymnastics and Taekwondo, besides Indian Women Hockey
team could not qualify for the London Olympics. So far, 47 sportspersons [31 Individual
Sportspersons in 5 disciplines (Archery, Athletics, Boxing, Shooting and Swimming) and Indian
Men Hockey Team (16 members)] have qualified for participation in London Olympics.
14.4 Till 29
th February 2012, an amount of approximately `123.73 crore has been spent on
preparation of athletes/teams towards coaching camps, foreign exposures, engagement of foreign
coaches etc., details of which are as under:–
(` in crore )
Sl. No. Item Expenditure incurred
1. Coaching camps 43.72
2. Foreign exposure 69.52
3. Foreign coaches 5.13
4. Assistance from National Sports Development 5.36
Fund (NSDF) towards customized training
14.5 The Committee has taken note of the efforts being made by the Ministry for
preparations for the London Olympics 2012. The Committee gives due credence to the
exceptional support given to the sportspersons during the Commonwealth Games 2010. The
sportspersons responded well to the support with excellent performance and this was
reflected in the large number of medals won by the country. The Committee expects that
the same kind of support would be given to the probables of the London Olympics. All
efforts should be directed towards coaching, provision of required equipments and most
important of all the taking care of the nutrition aspects of the sportspersons. The
Committee would once again reiterate that top priority should be accorded to the
preparations of sportspersons for the Olympics and they should be made the centre point
of all the initiatives discussion so as to get maximum medals for the country.
XV. NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND
15.1 The Fund was instituted by the Central Government in 1998 with a view to mobilizing
resources from non-governmental sources, including the private/corporate sector and non-resident
Indians, with Government providing matching grant, for the promotion of sports and games in the
country. The Committee was informed that during 2011-12, Jaypee Sports International and
Government of Maharashtra contributed `10 crore and `1 crore respectively to NSDF. Fund has
been made use of for providing tailor made customized training under selected coaches outside the
country for Olympics hopefuls.
15.2 The Committee is of the view that this Fund needs to be made more vibrant with higher
inflow from our corporate sector. There is no lack of funds. They are available in great abundance
for the popular game of cricket in our country with different business houses vying with each
other for sponsoring cricket matches at different levels. The Committee strongly feels that the
Ministry has to be more pro-active in this area  and approach some of the leading business

21
establishments on their own. In any case, additional funds made available by the corporate
sector would be for making our children/youth better sportspersons. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that as far as possible Government should ensure proper and
appropriate flow of funds for the development of sports in the country and also directs the
Ministry that they should not only depend on the Government funding but should look
towards generating additional resources/funds for the corporate sector by way of their social
responsibility. They should evolve new ideas for eliciting more cooperation from the private
sector which is hitherto they are getting. The corporate sector should be allowed more free
space in the scheme of things as to draw maximum support from them.
XVI. NA TIONAL PLAYING FIELDS ASSOCIATION OF INDIA (NPFAI)
16.1 NPFAI was established in February, 2009 as a Society under the Societies Registration Act,
1860. The Union Minister for Youth Affairs and Sports is the chairperson of NPFAI and other
members include senior officers of Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, representatives of State
Governments and other eminent persons of the Society. The main objective of NPFA are to protect,
preserve, promote, develop and improve playing fields and open spaces and other facilities for
sports and games; and to evolve a national policy on playing fields, playgrounds, play pitches, parks
and open spaces and it received `50.00 lacs as seed money from National Sports Development
Fund in July 2009.
16.2 While the NPFAI is apex body, all the State Governments are being encouraged to set up
similar societies at the State level which would be affiliated with the national society. This initiative
is expected to create a national awareness of the special benefits that flow out of playing fields,
playgrounds and open green spaces in terms of quality of life and social inclusiveness. All the State
Governments have been requested to set up similar bodies at State level and so far 10 States namely
Himachal Pradesh, Odisha, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh, Mizoram, West Bengal, Manipur, Rajasthan,
Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka have formed State level associations. Five States namely Himachal
Pradesh, Odisha, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh and Mizoram have been granted affiliation with NPFAI and
have been given assistance of `50.00 lakh each towards furthering the objectives of the Association
including meeting establishment and administrative expenses, maintaining a comprehensive database of
registered playing fields, providing legal assistance to endangered playing fields, conducting seminars/
workshops and providing assistance to support pilot projects at the State level.
16.3 NPFAI has developed basic playfields models of different sizes providing minimum facilities
which include leveled ground, kids play area with swings/slides etc play facility for one or two
sports disciplines, toilet facility etc. General guidelines for development of playfields are being
finalized for circulation to State Governments and they are expected to adopt the NPFAI guidelines
with suitable modifications according to local requirement.
16.4 The Ministry also informed the Committee that playfields/facilities have been developed in
two welfare organizations for Government employees, thirteen colleges and five schools in Delhi
under the Commonwealth Legacy Plan with Central Government assistance. The facilities created
include construction of synthetic courts for basketball, table tennis, shooting range, fitness centre
etc. and depict a uniform signage under the nomenclature Shera Maidans.
16.5 The Committee finds this a novel idea and a very positive step towards creating
space for children who are not professional sports persons but are prospective sports
persons. The well maintained playfields will promote sports and general health and well
being of children. At the same time the Committee is vary of the fact that such off the
track schemes loose their basic aim due to lack of proper guidelines, funds and strong
monitoring mechanism. The Ministry has to take care of these factors in order to make this
scheme a success.

22
16.6 The Committee has time and again pointed out the resource crunch in the
development of sports in general and infrastructure required for the purpose. The
Committee observed that development of sports culture in the country should be accorded
top priority as it channelises the youth energy into positive activities which help in the
nation building. This can be easily done by setting up a model sports school on a pilot basis
initially in those areas where sports talent in the youth is in evidence. Services of regional
SAI centres can be availed for this purpose. By nurturing our children and making available
all kinds of facilities for them, there would be no lack of sports talent in our country in
the future.

23
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
III. NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)
The Committee notes that there is general lack of awareness regarding the multiple
activities being carried out by the Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) in the country.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that extensive and intensive publicity may be taken
up at a higher scale so as to attract more and more youth power towards NYKS programmes
on a priority basis. Secondly, the Committee would appreciate if more and more activities
are planned exclusively for the youth living in villages and rural areas to make them more
suitable for their requirements so as to encourage them to take benefit of the schemes for
their betterment. (Para 3.4)
The Committee has been voicing its concern over the unduly long time taken in
having the presence of NYKS in all the districts of the country. The Committee finds no
justification for such a prolonged process going on in a very crucial area of youth welfare.
One plan period is already over and nothing positive seems to be evident so far. Concerted
efforts with a logical conclusion have to be made. (Para 3.10)
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Finance needs to provide the
adequate funds during the Twelfth Plan Period (2012-2017) for expanding NYKS in the
remaining 122 districts of the country. One must not forget that youths residing in these
uncovered 122 districts also belong to the country. (Para 3.11)
IV. NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS)
The Committee, however, is of the view that the NSS could not keep pace with the
desired expansion to Universities, Colleges and +2 schools despite there being huge
opportunity due to uneven distribution of NSS volunteers across the North and South of the
Country. Details of the universities and colleges covered presently under NSS also seen to
indicate that professional colleges like medical and engineering colleges which have shown
a phenomenal growth over the recent years have perhaps remained outside the purview of
the scheme. If that be so, Committee can conclude that a vast potential of our youth has
remained devoid of positive impact of NSS which has helped in creation of social awareness
among college/university/students. Its main objective is of nation building and national
integrity and therefore it needs special attention. (Para 4.4)
V. NATIONAL DISCIPLINE SCHEME
The number of instructors have remained static over so many years in States such
as Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, etc. and in Maharashtra and Rajasthan the
number of instructors have even increased. The Department was supposed to clear the dues
as a one time measure but as per the latest figures the number of NDS instructors is still
4719. The Committee would like to know the complete details from the Department on the
issue and action plan to liquidate the entire liability in one go. (Para 5.4)
VI. YOUTH HOSTELS
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should concentrate on completion of
23

24
construction of Hostels, upkeeping of the Hostels, their facelifting work and the
appointment of Managers etc. so that the purpose of building Youth Hostels is not defeated.
The Committee further recommends that after the completion of all the projects/works in
this regard, the Department then submit new plans for the construction of new hostels and
demand more funds for the purpose. (Para 6.6)
VII. SCOUTING AND GUIDING
The Committee finds that the Working Group for the Twelfth Plan has recommended
the merger of the Scouting and Guiding Movement with the existing National Programme
for Youth and Adolescent Development. It has also been recommended that an Impact
Assessment Study of the Bharat Scouts and Guides under the Central Scheme of Scouting
and Guiding be done by an independent institution. The Committee is of the view that both
the recommendations are worth consideration and implementation and the Ministry should
take the required steps in this direction. (Para 7.3)
VIII. RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT
The RGNIYD will become a landmark in formulation of policies for youth of our
country. It is now proposed to make this institute an institution of national process. The
process has already started therefor. As the apex national agency for youth development the
Institute shall develop into a globally recognized centre of academic and professional
excellence in the yield of youth development. The Committee hopes that the process would
be expedited and the institute would start working towards its cherished goals, for the
upliftment of our youth power. (Para 8.3)
IX. NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR YOUTH AND ADOLSCENT DEVELOPMENT (NPYAD)
The Committee on a perusal of utilisation figure under the programme finds that
though expenditure incurred under the NPYAD scheme upto 29.2.2012 is 87 per cent of the
allocation but at the same time 61 per cent has been spent in Delhi only, 13 per cent in
Karnataka and less than 10 per cent in other States. The Committee feels that a uniform
trend should be followed in utilising the funds to ensure an all round development.
(Para 9.4)
X. PANCHAYAT YUV A KRIDA AUR KHEL ABHIYAN (PYKKA)
The Committee is not happy with the reductions in budgetary provisions for PYKKA
which involves development of sports infrastructure at the grassroot level for the
marginalized section of the society. On a specific query regarding the funding of schemes
through MPLAD funds, the Committee was informed that it has been approved and circular
in this regard has been issued by the Ministry. The Committee welcomes the initiative for
funding of the scheme through MPLAD. It is for the Ministry to make optimum use of such
an opportunity. The Committee also has a word of caution for the implementing agencies.
The Ministry has to exhibit extra level of commitment and vigour in the achievement of
targets through mission mode so that the shortfall so far noticed in the delivery of
performance is bridged effectively. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would adopt a
proactive and pragmatic approach for better performance during the Twelfth Plan period.
(Para 10.5)
The Committee feels deeply concerned with the States’ inability to have the
maximum benefit from the scheme. The Committee is not aware whether any norms have

25
been laid down for development of playfields and training expenses per coach. If such
specification has already been made, then the same needs to be enforced judiciously. If not,
the Committee would appreciate if norms for every conceivable component are laid down.
(Para 10.8)
XI. URBAN SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE SCHEME
The Committee is happy to note that the scheme has been approved and funds have
been released for some projects. The Committee, however, feels that since this is the initial
state of formulation of policy for development of sports infrastructure, it should also take
into account the needs at block and district level. A large sports infrastructure for the city
may not be accessible to majority of the users or sportspersons but the effort should be to
build practice stadium conferring to the needs of a smaller group. The Committee cautious
the Ministry on the monitoring of the projects, its timely completion and proper utilization
of funds. (Para 11.4)
XII. PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
12.3 The Committee is aware that Para Olympics are held alongwith the Olympics at
international level. The amount of budgetary allocation to the scheme is not very
encouraging and not in any way assures that our para sportspersons will be benefited fully.
There is a need not only for coaches, sports equipment, but also sports infrastructure
especially for the disabled sports persons and the creation of an environment which is
friendly to such persons. The Committee is not aware whether any monitoring mechanism
is in place so as to ensure that this marginalized section of our society is in a position to
get full support of the scheme. The Committee would be happy if the Ministry takes an
initiative in this regard. (Para 12.3)
XIII. SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
The Committee is aware of the perennial problem of acute shortage of coaches in the
country. SAI has not been able to tackle this problem due to the lack of proper guidelines
or policy. It is expected that this new institution will emerge as an institution of excellence
and help not only in eliminating the shortage of coaches but develop coaches of
international standard. Coaching is the backbone and the basic strength behind excellent
performance in sports. Once this institution starts churning out good coaches, performance
of our sportspersons will automatically improve. The Committee strongly advocates a strong
coaching institution and hopes it should not suffer form low allocation of funds or under
utilization of funds. (Para 13.9)
XIV. LONDON OLYMPICS 2012
The Committee has taken note of the efforts being made by the Ministry for
preparations for the London Olympics 2012. The Committee gives due credence to the
exceptional support given to the sportspersons during the Commonwealth Games 2010. The
sportspersons responded well to the support with excellent performance and this was reflected
in the large number of medals won by the country. The Committee expects that the same
kind of support would be given to the pro babies of the London Olympics. All efforts should
be directed towards coaching, provision of required equipments and most important of all the
taking care of the nutrition aspects of the sportspersons. The Committee would once again
reiterate that top priority should be accorded to the preparations of sportspersons for the
Olympics and they should be made the centre point of all the initiatives discussion so as to
get maximum medals for the country. (Para 14.5)

26
XV. NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND
The Committee, recommends that as far as possible Government should ensure
proper and appropriate flow of funds for the development of sports in the country and also
directs the Ministry that they should not only depend on the Government funding but
should look towards generating additional resources/funds for the corporate sector by way
of their social responsibility. They should evolve new ideas for eliciting more cooperation
from the private sector which is hitherto they are getting. The corporate sector should be
allowed more free space in the scheme of things as to draw maximum support from them.
(Para 15.2)
XVI. NA TIONAL PLAYING FIELDS ASSOCIATION OF INDIA (NPFAI)
The Committee observed that development of sports culture in the country should be
accorded top priority as it channelises the youth energy into positive activities which help
in the nation building. This can be easily done by setting up a model sports school on a pilot
basis initially in those areas where sports talent in the youth is in evidence. Services of
regional SAI centres can be availed for this purpose. By nurturing our children and making
available all kinds of facilities for them, there would be no lack of sports talent in our
country in the future. (Para 16.6)

27
MINUTES

XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the
29th March, 2012 in Committee Room ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
3. Shri N.K. Singh
4. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Kuvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
6. Shri Sameer Bhijbal
7. Shri P.K. Biju
8. Shri Suresh Chanbassappa Angadi
9. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
10. Kumari Saroj Pandey
11. Shri Balakrishna Khanderao Shukla
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
13. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 'Vinnu'
14. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
LIST OF WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
1. Shrimati Sindhushree Khullar, Secretary (Sports)
2. Shri Rakesh Mohan, Joint Secretary (Youth Affairs)
3. Shrimati Anjali Anand Srivastava, JS & Financial Advisor
4. Shri Rahul Bhatnagar, Joint Secretary (Sports)
5. Shri Mukul Chatterjee, Joint Secretary (Sports)
29

30
6. Shrimati Sarda Ali Khan, Joint Secretary (NSS)
7. Shri Michael Vetha Siromony, Director (RGNIYD)
8. Shri R.N. Biswas, Director (IC)
9. Shri D.C.S. Rao, Director (Finance)
10. Shri C. Chinnappa, Director (PYKKA)
II. Sports Authority of India
11. Shri Desh Deepak Verma, Director General
12. Shri Gopal Krishna, Secretary
13. Dr. P.C. Kashyap, Executive Director (Teams)
14. Shri Sanjay Saraswat, Director (P&C)
15. Shri Joe Sebstian, Executive Director (Operations)
16. Shri Raj Kumar Chopra, Director (Finance)
17. Shrimati Meena Bora, Director
III. Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan
18. Shri C.S. Pran, Director
19. Shri S.K. Thakur, Director
2 . ***    *
3 . ***    *
4. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports gave a presentation on the
Demands for Grants 2012-13 of the Ministry with emphasis on the activities and achievements of
the Ministry and briefly explained the budgetary allocation under different heads. The Chairman and
members raised queries in light of the presentation and the budgetary documents which were
replied to by the Secretary and other officials of the Ministry.
5. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.40 
P.M. to meet again on 10 th and 11 th April, 2012.
*** Relates to other matter.

31
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the
30th April, 2012 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Shri M. Rama Jois
3. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
4. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
5. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shri Kuvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
7. Shri P.K. Biju
8. Shri Suresh Chanbasappa Angadi
9. Shri Kail Muni Karwariya
10. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
11. Shri Ashok Tawar
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to consider and adopt the draft 243
rd, 244 th and 245 th Reports on the Demand for Grants
2012-13 of the Ministry of Women and Child Development, Department of School Education and
Literacy and the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports respectively.
3. The Committee, then considered and adopted the draft 243
rd 244 th and 245 th Reports without
any modifications.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M.
31

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.