143rd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/143rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:21]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
HUNDRED – FORTY THIRD REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE HUNDRED THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS 2003-2004 (DEMAND NO. 47) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF INDIAN SYSTEMS OF MEDICINE & HOMOEOPATHY
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON   12TH DECEMBER, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2003)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2003/AGRAHAYANA, 1925 (SAKA)
                                                       E-mail: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
                                                              Website: http//parliamentofindia.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                 
2.         PREFACE                                                                                                            
3.         REPORT                                                                                                                                      
CHAPTER  I   Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government            
                                            
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of
the                                                
                        Government’s replies                                                                      
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been      
                        accepted by the Committee                                                                        
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   replies of the Government are still
awaited                                          
4.         MINUTES                                                                                                                                                                  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2003)

143rd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/143rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:21]
 
Shri Arjun Singh           ¾¾                Chairman
 
MEMBERS
            RAJYA SABHA
 
Dr. Abrar Ahmed        
Dr. Akhilesh Das
Shri B.P. Apte 
Shri Bachani Lekhraj
Shri Eduardo Faleiro
Prof. R.B.S. Varma
Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik
Shri Lalhmingliana
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey
Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav Ravi
Shri R. Sarath Kumar
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
^Shri Mrinal Sen
Smt. Vanga Geetha
*Shri Dara Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shri Ambareesha
Shri Ramakant Angle
Shri Kirti Jha Azad
Shri G. S. Basavaraj
Shri Ram Rati Bind
Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria
Prof. Kailasho Devi
Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit
Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
Shri R.L. Jalappa
Shri Baliram Kashyap
Shri Brij Lal Khabri
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri Y.G. Mahajan
#Shri  G.Mallikarjunappa
Dr. Manda Jagannath
Smt. Nivedita Mane
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
^ Ceased to be member w.e.f.26
th August, 2003
*  Nominated   w.e.f. 26th September, 2003.
# Died on 30th November, 2003.
 
Shrimati Jas Kaur Meena
Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
Smt. Kumudini Patnaik
Smt. Renu Kumari
Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao

143rd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/143rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:21]
Shri Sunil Dutt
Shri Ramsheth Thakur
Dr. N. Venkataswamy
Smt. Ganti Vijaykumari
Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
*Shri G.J. Javia
*Shri Ali Mohammed Naik
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
^ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 29
th   January, 2003
*  Nominated   w.e.f. 7th April, 2003.
PREFACE
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee do hereby present this Hundred-Forty Third Report on Action
Taken by Government on the recommendations contained in its Hundred Thirty Seventh  Report onDemands for Grants
(Demand No.47) of the Department of Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, for the year 2003-2004.
2.         The Hundred Thirty Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23
rd  April, 2003.  Replies
of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of Indian System of
Medicine and Homoeopathy, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare were considered by the Committee at its meeting
held on the 9th December, 2003. 
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 9th December, 2003.
 
NEW DELHI
December 9, 2003      
Agrahayana 18,  1925 (Saka)       
ARJUN SINGH
Chairman
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on  Human Resource Development
REPORT
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations/Observations
contained in its One Hundred-Thirty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No.47) of the Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2003-2004.
2.         Action Taken Notes received from the Government have been considered by the Committee have been
categorized as follows:-
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 2.3, 2.5, 3.1&3.2, 4.1to4.2, 5.2&5.3,
7.2      (Chapter I) Total- 9
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
6.2&6.3   (Chapter II)  Total-2
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the

143rd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/143rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:21]
Committee: 2.4, 4.3, 8.2       (Chapter-III)  Total-3
 
(iv)       Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited:  8.3  
(Chapter – IV) Total-1
 
The final  replies in respect of  the recommendations/observations made in Chapter IV of the Report are still awaited
from the Department. The Committee may be apprised of the same as and when action is taken.
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
II         STRATEGIES FOR 10th FIVE-YEAR PLAN
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
2.3       The Secretary of the Department informed the Committee that against the  BE for the 9
th  plan period of 
Rs.364.43 crore, RE Rs.317.8 crores; actual expenditure was Rs.293.71 crores.  Thus there was a short fall of Rs.70.72
crore and the reasons given for the short fall are as under-
-           Implementing agencies did not submit utilization certificates on time for availing 2nd subsequent installments;
-           States were slow in submitting proposals;
-           Whenever construction was involved,
-           Necessary civic clearances took a long time;
States gave low priority of ISM&H as compared to Health & Family Welfare
 
Action Taken
 
2.3       In order to monitor the expenditure of allotted budget, utilization of grants and submission of utilization
certificates (UCs) by the States/grantee institutions, a Monitoring Mechanism was evolved and a proforma has been
circulated to States for procuring monthly information on regular basis.   The objective is to persuade the States and
grantee institutions to utilize the funds in time and submit the Utilisation Certificate etc. so that fresh proposals could be
considered for sanction of grants. The monitoring is being done regularly. Achievement-cum-performance report in
every case of grant is being obtained to assess the impact of assistance given to a particular institution.  States especially
the North Eastern States are being repeatedly reminded.  All the pending Civic clearances for the Central Govt. Projects
have been obtained and the construction works started. A meeting of all the health secretaries of States was called on
31
st July and Ist August, 2003,  to sensitize them about the new Schemes besides getting feedback about the
implementation status  of the ongoing schemes.
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
2.5       The Committee feels that non submission of utilization certificates by the States is a perennial problem which is
derailing several developmental activities in the States.  The Committee is happy to note that Ministry of Finance has
formulated  guidelines on furnishing of utilisation certificates by the States. The Committee recommends that the
Department should constantly keep on hammering the states to submit utilization certificates and vigorously  implement
the Finance Ministry’s Guideline.
 
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department for the 10
th Plan.  However, the Committee, feels that unless
the causes for low utilization of funds as identified in the 9th  Plan are  addressed, the objectives of the 10th Plan may
not be fully realized.  As far as non submission of utilization certificates by the ‘Implementing Agencies’ is concerned,
the Committee feels that there could be possibilities of diversion, misutilisation or in some cases misappropriation of
Government funds. The Committee, therefore,  recommends that the Department should make an investigation as to
st

143rd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/143rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:21]
how the 1  Instalment of money has been utilized and fix responsibility in cases where  funds  have been  found to be
misappropriated .  The Committee is dismayed at the fact that most of the civic work required for the development of
the country gets trapped into labyrinths  of laws and by laws.  More laws means more beauracratization and more red
tape and thereby causing unnecessary postponement of or delay in implementing various developmental schemes.  The
Committee, therefore, feels that it is high time for the  Government including its various Department and Ministries to
put their head together, simplify the rules and procedures and also consider giving publicity to the schemes and
programmes aimed at the welfare of the People.
 
Action Taken
 
In the meeting of State Health Secretaries called on 31
st July and Ist August, 2003, the states were advised to
immediately submit all pending Utilization Certificates. The progress is being monitored regularly.  In some cases,
States have not released funds to the implementing agencies.  They have been repeatedly  impressed upon to implement
the schemes expeditiously to achieve the endresults and furnish Utilization Certificates.
The suggestions in this regard put forth by the Committee have been taken note of. Further, recently issued directions of
Ministry to pass on funds directly to implementing agencies will really help in expediting the pace of utilization of
funds.   All the old schemes of the department have recently been reviewed and the proforma etc simplified.  To ensure
wider publicity, activities including schemes of the Department have been put on internet in user friendly format. A
News Letter has also been started to publicize the activities of the Department.  To facilitate, formulation and
submission of good research project proposals, a workshop on research methodology was conducted by CCRAS.  All
the state holders were invited and guided.
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
3.1       The Plan allocation for the Department in BE 2003-2004, is Rs150 crores. The Committee notes that the plan
allocation for the Department in BE 2002-2003 was Rs.150 crores which was reduced to Rs.105 crores   at the RE
stage.  The Department has  given `head-wise’ reduction in RE 2002-2003 as follows:
 
                          B.E.               R.E.
(i) Development of Institution
                            20.00                       11.70
(ii) Hospital & Dispensaries
                              10.50                   2.34
(iii) Drug Quality Control
                                 8.75                 5.42
(iv) Other Programmes and Schemes
                                   3.00        1.32
 
(v) Lumpsum provision for North East
                                   15.00    10.50
(vi) Strengthening of Pharmacopoeil Laboratory of Indian Medicine/Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeil Laboratory
                                      5.00      Nil
(vii) Strengthening of Pharmacopical Committee
                                       1.65    0.5
(viii) Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga
                                       4.50    3.17
(ix) Medicinal Plants Board
                                     23.16  15.00
(x) Extra Mural Research Scheme
                                       2.00    0.68
(xi) Innovative scheme for the  development of Medicinal Plants

143rd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/143rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:21]
                                        1.00  0.5
Explaining the reasons for reduction, the Department has informed  that  “this being the first year of the 10th Plan, a
number of new schemes were prepared for appraisal and approval, as required, of Planning Commission and
Department of  Expenditure for implementation during the 10th plan. However, the concurrence of Integrated Finance
Division, in-principle approval of Planning Commission, appraisal of Department of Expenditure, Plan Appraisal
Division of Planning Commission & clearance through EFCs and SFCs took a lot of time. Also, as a part of Zero Based
Budgeting(ZBB) exercise, all schemes were reviewed and regrouped by Planning Commission. This delayed the take
off of most of the schemes resulting in slow pace of expenditure and reduced RE.
 
Action Taken
 
3.1     By the time RE was finalized, the Schemes of the Department were at formulation stage and had not taken off. 
Therefore, a cut was imposed by Ministry of Finance.  Most of the schemes could take off only in the last quarter of the
year and therefore utilization of Rs.89 crore only could be done against RE of Rs.105 crore.  While delay in finalization
of New Schemes was one major reason for this gap between allocation and utilization, the lack of response from states,
the non furnishing of Utilization Certificates, non submission of proposals from North Eastern States and Sikkim, delay
in receipt of civic clearances in construction projects, non keeping of commitments by Contractors were other important
reasons.  Almost all schemes have now taken off and utilization is likely to improve this year.
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
3.2       The Committee is constrained to observe that in all the above mentioned 11 schemes, the allocation was reduced
at  RE stage. The Committee feels that prior to submitting its demands before Parliament, the Department should
conclude all necessary consultations with the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance and obtain their clearance
so that its budgetary allocation, once approved by  Parliament,  is not reduced subsequently.
 
Action Taken
 
3.2       This observation of the committee has also been noted for compliance in future. Due care will be taken to
complete all formalities prior to submitting its demands before Parliament.
 
IV.       PRACTICE OF INDIAN SYSTEMS OF MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY IN PRIMARY HEALTH
CENTRES
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
4.1       The Committee is aware of the fact that the Primary Health Centers in general and particularly situated in remote
and far-flung areas are not functioning well. Doctors posted in such centers are either not inclined to accept rural posting
and if posted in a rural area, opt for an urban posting at the first available opportunity. As a result, majority of the
population of the Country which lives in rural areas are deprived of health services.
 
Action Taken
 
4.1       It is in this background that efforts are being made to post ISM&H doctors in PHCs of the States. However, the
states have to be adequately responsive to achieve the end results.
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
4.2       In reply to a question, the Secretary informed the Committee that the States of Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu
and Kerala have posted ISMH doctors in their PHCs who have been assigned specific duties which are normally done
by the doctors of modern system.  In Himachal Pradesh, about 100 PHCs were without a doctor.  As  no allopathic
system doctor was willing to go there, the ISMH doctors were posted in such PHCs which resulted in increased
utilization of their services.  The Secretary further informed the Committee about a policy decision taken  some years 

143rd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/143rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:21]
back that out of four posts, one post should be given to the ISMH doctors.  However, it is for the State Governments to
implement the decision.
 
Action Taken
 
4.2       The Department is pleading with State Governments in above mentioned line on all opportunities.
 
V.  AYURVEDA
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
5.2  The Plan allocation for Ayurveda in 2003-2004 is Rs.14.46 crores. The Committee has been informed that amongst
the European Countries only Hungary  has recognized the system of Ayurveda. Countries like, Russia, Italy, Spain,
Belgium, U.K. and U.S.A. though have shown keen interest for the system, are yet to recognize it.  These Countries,
though are positive about recognizing the system of Ayurveda but want assurance about the quality and safety of drugs. 
The Department has further informed that for ensuring quality control it has recently introduced good manufacturing
practices and laid down certain norms and standards for manufacture of Ayurvedic Medicine.
 
Action Taken
 
5.2       In the area of Drug standardization, following progress has been made:
Three volumes of Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of  India have been published and fourth volume is going to the press for
publication. So far 326 standard formulations on single drugs have been completed.
Two volumes of Ayurvedic Formulary of India containing 636 formulations have been published.
13 projects have been allotted to the various laboratories to develop Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) of
manufacturing processes and shelf life studies of compound Ayurvedic drugs.
17 State Drug Testing Laboratories for ISM drugs have been financed.
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
5.3   The Committee feels that the European Countries, USA and other developed and prosperous countries have
tremendous potential to become an extremely lucrative market for the Ayurvedic drugs of our country and can generate
a lot of foreign exchange for the Country. However, in order to achieve this, as rightly pointed out by the Department,
the confidence of such countries w.r.t. the safety and quality of such drugs has to be won. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that the Department should keep a tight vigil of the quality and safety of the Ayurveda drugs
manufactured and used in India or exported out of India so that more and more countries recognize our traditional
system of medicine.
 
The Committee observes that people opt for traditional medicine because they are affordable and less harmful.
However, the experts have voiced concerns about the safety and quality, licensing of providers and standards of training
in connection with traditional medicines.
The World Health Organization has come out with a traditional medicine strategy for 2002-2005 which focuses on these
issues. According to WHO, 70 per cent of Indian population use traditional medicine for their primary health needs.
 
A group of experts recently met in Delhi to chalk out an adequate strategy for integration of traditional medicine with
the health care system in India. According to these experts, a set of standards for regulating traditional medicine and
setting up of a body to provide to medical claims is necessary.
The Committee feels the safety and efficiency of traditional medicine has been established through centuries of use.
However, in order to make it acceptable to the outside world it may be necessary to validate its scientific basis. Here,
the Committee is of the view that we need not tinker with our system for this purpose. Chernobyl incident convinced
Russians about the efficacy of our system of medicine when the victims’ burns were miraculously healed. Likewise
there are many simple plants and products like neem and turmeric, the efficacy of which tempted some countries abroad
to have these products patented for commercial exploitation. The Committee therefore reiterates that the system need
not be tinkered with to convince the outside world.

143rd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/143rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:21]
 
The attention of the Committee has been drawn to the fact that there are many traditional medicine practitioners who
have claimed a cure for some disease or the other. In most cases they end up making rounds of Government agencies or
try to sell their formula to pharmaceuticals but to little avail e.g. the person who claimed to have developed a herbal
contraceptive in the 1980, passed away by the time Government decided to follow it up. The Committee observes the
need to avoid such situations. The Government machinery should be suitably geared up and be responsive in such
situations.
 
Action Taken
 
5.3       The Department of Indian Systems of Medicines & Homoeopathy is committed to provide quality medicine to
the consumers. The National Policy of ISM&H 2002 envisages that:
Mostly Pharmacopoeial work related to Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy drugs would be completed by
2005. Enforcement mechanism will be activised.
Industry would be encouraged to make use of Quality Certification Scheme being introduced by the Department for
batch-by-batch testing.
Financial support would be given for acquisition of ISO 9000 certification by ISM industry.
 (d) New Legislation covering a vast range of nutraceuticals and food      supplements which are neither covered by the
drug licensing nor food licensing would be introduced
Quality Control Centres would be set up or recognized on a Regional basis to standardize the in process quality control
of ISM products and to modernize traditional processes without changing the concepts of ISM. States would be advised
to augment facilities for drug manufacture and testing of the drugs.
Drugs and Cosmetic Act would be amended to also cover grant of manufacturing licenses for intermediate or partially
processed herbal mixed and pharmacopoeial standards evolved for these intermediaries.
Towards achievement of these targets, the Department has implemented Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Quality
Control of Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani & Homoeopathy drugs. Under this scheme, there are 5 sub-schemes as follows:
Scheme for strengthening and establishment of State/U.T. Government Drug Manufacturing Pharmacies of ISM&H
drugs  (For State Govt.)
Scheme for strengthening enforcement mechanism for Quality Control of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani & Homoeopathy
drugs in states( for State Government).
Scheme for use of modern technology and bio-technology in Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani & Homoeopathy drugs
development ( for research institutions).
Scheme for assisting Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drug manufacturing units to strengthen in-house Quality Control
section/DTL to meet the requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices(GMP) (for ISM drug manufacturers)
Scheme for assistance to Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drug manufacturing units for obtaining Good Manufacturing
Practices(GMP) certification ( for ISM drug manufacturers).
 
Under the above scheme the Government have strengthened 17 State Drug Testing Laboratories and 32 Pharmacies of
ISM&H during the financial year 2002-2003. State DTL and Pharmacies have been approved by Project Selection
Committee (PSC) for giving assistance. In addition, Project Selection Committee (PSC) have approved for three states
i.e. Rajasthan, Punjab and Assam to strengthen their enforcement mechanism for Quality Control of Ayurveda, Siddha,
Unani and Homoeopathy drugs.
As far gearing up Government machinery to be responsive to the findings of traditional medicine practitioner, the
suggestion of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
 
YOGA AND NATUROPATHY
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
7.2       The Plan allocation for Yoga and Naturopathy for the year 2003-2004 is Rs.5.10 crores.  The Committee has
been informed that there are 6 colleges in the country which are imparting training in yoga and naturopathy and there is
also a Central Council for Yoga and Naturopathy which provides money for research and running of various schemes. 
The Secretary while deposing before the Committee informed that the Department of ISMH is planning to pass an Act
in the Parliament so as to empower the Council to grant recognition to the council so that Naturopathy and Yoga are

143rd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/143rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:21]
regulated like other disciplines.
The Committee observes that the pros and cons should be considered before taking a decision to introduce legislation  in
this regard.
 
Action Taken
 
7.2   Keeping in view number of colleges imparting education and number of practitioners, it may not be possible to
enact a Central Act, for regulating education and practice of Yoga & Naturopathy for the present. However, as an
interim measure, steps have been initiated to authorize the Central Council for Research in Yoga & Naturopathy
(CCRYN), New Delhi to work out modalities for regulation of Yoga & Naturopathy education and practice.  As a long
term measure, the Central Government would enact a suitable legislation for establishing a Council for regulation of
Yoga & Naturopathy education and practice at an appropriate time. While enacting the legislation, thesuggestion of the
Committee will be kept in view.
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENTS’ REPLY
 
VI        HOMOEOPATHY
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
6.2       Plan allocation for Homoeopathy was Rs. 10.21 crores in BE 2002-2003. However it has been reduced to Rs.
9.17 crores in BE 2003-2004. The Secretary while deposing before the Committee informed that presently there are 80
colleges of homoeopathy in the Country and out of which 17 colleges are imparting PG education.  However, there is no
separate university for Homoeopathy.
 
Action Taken
 
6.2       It is a matter of record.  There is no university of Homoeopathy, however, a National Institute of Homoeopathy
(N.I.H.) is already there.  It has been decided to upgrade it  into a Centre of Excellence, in the last Governing Body’s
meeting.  The action has been initiated.
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
6.3       The Committee feels that in the absence of a separate university, the Homoeopathy education is perhaps not
getting the attention it deserves. The Committee further feels that the quality of imparting Homoeopathy education can
be vastly improved if an exclusive Homoeopathy university is established to regulate and monitor the functioning of the
medical colleges throughout the Country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should consider
establishing a separate Homoeopathy University and the allocation under the head `Homoeopathy should be increased
accordingly.
 
At the same time there have been illiterate persons who acquired marvelous proficiency in developing this system of
medicine.  The Committee, therefore, feels that there should be room for persons with average qualification to study and
develop their skills in the field of Homoeopathy.  Part time colleges should also be encouraged to help people come
forward to acquire knowledge and expertise in this system of medicine.
 
Action Taken
 
6.3 The Central Council of Homoeopathy(CCH), New Delhi is set up under the Homoeopathic Central Council Act,
1973.  The objective of the CCH is to regulate the Homoeopathic practice and lay down the standards for Homoeopathic
education in the country. At present, we have 182 Under Graduate colleges and 31 Post-graduate colleges affiliated to
various Indian Universities.  In some of the States, a single University regulates the Homoeopathic teaching and
examination systems and in some of the States different regional Universities are taking care of the Homoepathic

143rd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/143rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:21]
education. There is no separate Homoeopathic University in any State or under the Central Government.  However, the
suggestions of the Committee to have an exclusive Homoeopathic University has been noted.At present, the National
Institute of Homoeopathy is being upgraded from 60 bedded Hospital to 100 bedded Hospital and the plans are there to
make it a Centre of Excellence.
 
Since Homoeopathic education and practice is regulated through the Homoeopathic Central Council Act, 1973, part-
time course in Homoeopathy is not desirable in the opinion of experts of Homoeopathy.  Nevertheless, the suggestion of
Committee has been noted in this regard  too.
 
CHAPTER-III
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
II          STRATEGIES  FOR  10
th  FIVE  YEAR  PLAN
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
2.4       In order to deal with the problem of non-submission of utilization certificate by the States, the Secretary
informed that the only way to deal with this problem was to monitor the programme very strictly and persuade the State
Governments to submit the utilization certificates on time.  The Secretary further informed that the Finance Ministry
had recently come out with guidelines that the States which did not pass on the funds to the implementing agencies and
thereby causing delay in utilization of funds would be penalized.
 
Action Taken
 
2.4       Matter of record. However, recently, instructions have been received from the Finance Ministry that funds under
Centrally Sponsored Schemes can directly be released to implementing agencies.  This may ease situation in future.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE.
 
2.4       Main concern of the Committee has been the slow-utilisation of grants by the Department allocated for the
popularisation and development of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy and the Committee had been
reiterating this concern from time to time in its previous Reports.  To utter dismay of the Committee, the situation has
not improved despite the Government's claim of doing its best in this regard. The Committee is of the opinion that the
problem of non-utilisation of expenditure is a serious problem which has become perennial and unavoidable.  While
appreciating the practical problems involved in view of ours being a federal State, the Committee recommends that this
malady has to be taken up at the highest level.
 
As regards the decision of the Ministry of Finance to provide the grants directly to the implementing agencies instead
the States, the Committee feels that it may also not be able to curb the problem effectively as currently these
implementing agencies also were not submitting the Utilisation Certificates to the concerned State Governments for the
grants received by them.  In other words, if the Union Government is not able to persuade/convince/force twenty eight
States and seven Union Territories, the monitoring of so many implementing agencies would, no doubt, be an enormous
task.
 
 
IV.       PRACTICE OF INDIAN SYSTEMS OF MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY IN PRIMARY HEALTH
CENTRES
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
4.3       While the Committee appreciates the  steps taken by the State of Himachal Pradesh and feels that such steps

143rd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/143rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:21]
should not only solve the problem of non-availability of allopathic doctors in PHCs but would also popularize Indian
System of Medicine and make career prospects in this field more attractive even though this may not be a legally
advisable step.  The Committee, recommends that the Department should persuade the States to follow the example of
Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Kerala.  The Department should also do away with legal hudles, if any, in this
regard.
 
Action Taken
 
4.3   A letter was written to all the states in the month of November, 2002 in this regard. The subject was reviewed in
the meeting of the Health Secretaries on 1
st August, 2003, and the feedback was that in Madhya Pradesh 187 ISM&H
doctors have been posted in PHCs temporarily, in Uttar Pradesh 1,000 ISM&H doctors, in West Bengal 347 ( including
at APHCs) and Uttaranchal 121 ISM&H doctors have already been posted in PHCs while in Orissa, the decision to post
these doctors in place of allopaths has been withheld due to lot of resentment.  In Bihar 464 posts have been further
identified by Cabinet for this purpose while 112 ISM&H doctors already stand posted.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
4.3       The Committee is happy to learn that due to Department's efforts, the States were gradually posting more and
more ISM&H Doctors to the PHCs, particularly in the rural areas.  There is a need to impress upon the remaining
States/UTs also to do the same.  The Committee, however, expresses its apprehension that allowing these ISM&H
Doctors practising allopathy in PHCs might militate against our aim of popularisation of the ISM&H as it has been seen
that these Doctors generally prescribe allopathic medicines and forget about the ISM&H.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that this policy should be implemented by taking every precaution to take care of this tendency.   
 
VIII     QUALITY CONTROL OF DRUGS
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
8.2       Quality Control of ISM&H drugs is one of the priority areas of the Department.  The Secretary informed the
Committee that the state Drug Licensing Authority has been designated as the ‘Licensing Authority’ and are mandated
to take  all measures to ensure quality control.  However, the machinery and infrastructure required for testing of drugs
is very poor in most of the States.  The Secretary has further informed that during the 10
th Five Year Plan, the
Department of ISM&H would be providing some assistance to the State Government to strengthen the machinery. The
Committee is happy to note that despite all odds, the Department has been able to provide assistance to the State
Governments.  However, the  Committee feels that mere strengthening  of machinery would not serve any useful
purpose unless the State Drug Control Authorities vigorously monitor the quality of drugs produced.  Otherwise the
machines will remain idle.   At the same time, as pointed out in the foregoing paragraph,  the Committee is of the view
that the machinery should be responsive, devoid of corruption and preserve the system and should not unnecessarily
promote too much of commercialization by diluting the principles.
 
Action Taken
 
8.2      The Department has strengthened 17 State Drug Testing Laboratories and 32 Pharmacies of ISM&H by giving
machinery/equipments, and manpower support to improve the turn over of their products. At the same time, State Drug
Testing Laboratories have been strengthened by giving financial assistance to improve their existing infrastructure,
building, equipment, manpower etc. for testing of ISM&H drugs in the states to ensure the quality medicine. A scheme
for strengthening of enforcement mechanism quality control of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy drugs in
states have been implemented during Tenth Five Year Plan. Proposal from various states including Rajasthan, Punjab
and Assam have been considered for strengthening of enforcement mechanism. The testing parameters have already
been laid in the form of Ayurvedic PharmacopoeiaAyurvedic Formulary of India, National Formulary of Unani
Medicine wherein method of preparations of Ayurvedic, Unani medicines have been prescribed, have also been
published. These methods of preparation have to be followed by ISM industries in the country.
 
COMMENTS OF THE  COMMITTEE

143rd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/143rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:21]
 
8.2    While the Committee is happy that the Department was implementing a comprehensive plan for strengthening the
Drug testing in states to ensure the quality of ISM&H drugs,  it however,  is of  the view that despite these measures
taken by the Department as  in the case of allopathy, market is flooded with fake and spurious drugs. In view of its
experience of sub-standard drugs in allopathy, the Committee recommends that the Department should ensure an
effective monitoring mechanism so that   the authorities who are responsible for ensuring the quality of drugs act in a
more responsible  manner and are punished severely  in case of dereliction of duty.
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 
VIII     QUALITY CONTROL OF DRUGS
Recommendation/Observation
 
8.3       It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that innumerable advertisements claiming that by using
Ayurveda drugs a person height can be increased or weight can be reduced or a drug claiming to be an Indian version of
viagra appear in the magazines and newspapers which are exploiting common people and taking them for a ride. 
Committee's attention was drawn to advertisements by a doctor  from Rishikesh who claims to treat and cure epilepsy. 
In reply to a query whether the claims made have been verified, the Department replied that
‘The Department is aware of advertisements appearing in Newspaper about treatment of Epilepsy by Dr Gupta of
Rishikesh (Uttranchal).  However, the clinical data have not been made available to the Department for evaluation of the
claim.  In normal course, persons claiming to have developed treatment of any particular disease should approach the
Government with full data in regard to efficacy of drugs and clinical evaluation for verification by the Department’.
In this context the Committee would like to quote Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 3715 dated the 24.4. 2000 and
the reply of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on the same subject as under:
“ Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare  be pleased to state :
  (a) Whether it is a fact that a person claiming to be an expert in epilepsy in Rishikesh has been declared as quack by a
team of Indian Medical Association;
(b) If so, whether Government propose to take any action against him;
(c) If so, by when and the details thereof; and
(d) If not, the reasons therefore?
 
ANSWER
 
 (a) A team of doctors was deputed by I.M.A. to Rishikesh on 31st January, 2000 to look into the working of Dr. R.K.
Gupta who has been advertising in newspapers about his claim of treatment and complete cure of Epilepsy. I.M.A.
found that Dr. Gupta's newspapers advertisement was in clear violation of medical ethics; as he was soliciting payments,
using ayurvedic medicine having no proven effect on patients of Epilepsy and giving antiepileptic drugs, in very high
doses, which are toxic and dangerous.
 
(b),(c) & (d)    The complaint of I.M.A. against Dr. R,K, Gupta of Rishikesh was  brought to the notice of Medical
Council of India and the Central Council of Indian Medicine. The Central Council of Indian Medicine has requested the
Controller, Bhartiya Chikitsa Parishad, Lucknow to examine the whole matter and take appropriate action against Dr. R.
K.Gupta, who is registered under that Council, under the Indian Medicine `(Standards of Professional Conduct,
Etiquette & Code of Ethics) Regulations, 1982, framed under Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970. 
In the opinion of the Committee, above reply gives a different picture than what Department replied before the
Committee.  The Department should look into these variations and consider pursuing the matter for taking such action
as is called for in the situation after examining the claims made by the doctor in this regard.
 
Action Taken
 
8.3       The matter has already been taken up with the State Director(ISM) of Uttaranchal. A d.o. letter on 3
rd June, 2003

143rd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/143rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:21]
was written to Shri D.S. Nath, Additional Secretary (Health), Government of Uttaranchal to find out the facts and to
take action under Drugs Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act. Another reminder on 10.9.2003 has been
sent to Additional Secretary (Health), Uttaranchal indicating that the advertisements made by Dr. R.K. Gupta of
Rishikesh are in violation of DMR(OA) and State Govt. should investigate the matter to initiate appropriate action.
 
This relates to the Dept. of Health.  Deptt. of ISM&H have no comments on it.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
8.2       It is quite bewildering to note that a person was cheating the people who are poor and ill, by violating every legal
norms with total impunity and the government and its agencies have not been able to take any action against that person
so far.   Department of ISM&H appears to be passing the buck on to the Department of Health and the latter to the State
Government.   The Committee, therefore recommends that the case should be taken up by the Department of ISM&H
and the State Government so that necessary legal action may be initiated against that person and inform the Committee
within three  months if the action taken in the matter.
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
II          STRATEGIES  FOR  10
th  FIVE  YEAR  PLAN
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE.
 
            Main concern of the Committee has been the slow-utilisation of grants by the Department allocated for the
popularisation and development of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy and the Committee had been
reiterating this concern from time to time in its previous Reports.  To utter dismay of the Committee, the situation has
not improved despite the Government's claim of doing its best in this regard. The Committee is of the opinion that the
problem of non-utilisation of expenditure is a serious problem which has become perennial and unavoidable.  While
appreciating the practical problems involved in view of ours being a federal State, the Committee recommends that this
malady has to be taken up at the highest level.
 
As regards the decision of the Ministry of Finance to provide the grants directly to the implementing agencies instead
the States, the Committee feels that it may also not be able to curb the problem effectively as currently these
implementing agencies also were not submitting the Utilisation Certificates to the concerned State Governments for the
grants received by them.  In other words, if the Union Government is not able to persuade/convince/force twenty eight
States and seven Union Territories, the monitoring of so many implementing agencies would, no doubt, be an enormous
task. (Para 2.4)
 
IV.       PRACTICE OF INDIAN SYSTEMS OF MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY IN PRIMARY HEALTH
CENTRES
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
4.3       The Committee is happy to learn that due to Department's efforts, the States were gradually posting more and
more ISM&H Doctors to the PHCs, particularly in the rural areas.  There is a need to impress upon the remaining
States/UTs also to do the same.  The Committee, however, expresses its apprehension that allowing these ISM&H
Doctors practising allopathy in PHCs might militate against our aim of popularisation of the ISM&H as it has been seen
that these Doctors generally prescribe allopathic medicines and forget about the ISM&H.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that this policy should be implemented by taking every precaution to take care of this tendency.   (Para 4.3)
 
VIII      QUALITY CONTROL OF DRUGS
 
COMMENTS OF THE  COMMITTEE
 
8.2    While the Committee is happy that the Department was implementing a comprehensive plan for strengthening the

143rd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/143rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:21]
Drug testing in states to ensure the quality of ISM&H drugs,  it however,  is of  the view that despite these measures
taken by the Department as  in the case of allopathy, market is flooded with fake and spurious drugs. In view of its
experience of sub-standard drugs in allopathy, the Committee recommends that the Department should ensure an
effective monitoring mechanism so that   the authorities who are responsible for ensuring the quality of drugs act in a
more responsible  manner and are punished severely  in case of dereliction of duty. (Para 8.2)
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
XXIII
TWENTY-THIRD MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.30 p.m. on Tuesday, the 9
th December, 2003 in Committee Room No. 63 First Floor,
Parliament House , New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS  PRESENT
 
Shri Arjun Singh                       Chairman
 
            RAJYA SABHA
 
Smt. Vanga Geetha
Prof. R.B.S. Varma
Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik
Shri Lalhmingliana
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
Shri Dara Singh 
 
            LOK SABHA
 
Shri Kanti Lal Bhuria
Shri Ram Rati Bind
Shri R.L. Jalappa
Shri A. F. Golam Osmani
Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
Shri Ramsheth Thakur
Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
               
2.           The Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee, specially the new member Shri Dara Singh, MP,
Rajya Sabha who attended the meeting for the first time.
 
3.         The Committee then took up for consideration  the Action Taken Reports (142
nd to 147th ) on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Reports of the Committee on Demand-for-grants(2003-04) relating to
the Departments of Family Welfare; Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy; Elementary Education and

143rd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/143rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:21]
Literacy; Secondary and Higher Education; Women and Child Development; and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports.
The Committee adopted these reports and decided to present them reports to the Houses of Parliament on the12th
December, 2003.
 
4.          Thereafter, some members raised the issue of taking the ISM&H for a special study. The Committee was
informed that a Background Note on the subject had been received from the Department. It was decided that the same
could be circulated to the members before a meeting with the officials of the Department of the ISM&H could be held at
an appropriate time.
 
5.         The Chairman informed the Committee that Action Taken Report of the Department of Health could not be
prepared as the Department had not sent action taken notes so far, despite several reminders, written and verbal.  He also
informed that many other references made by the Committee were pending with the Department for the past several
months. They do not even acknowledge our letters, not to speak of sending replies.  The Committee viewed it seriously
and decided to summon Secretary, Department of Health to ascertain reasons for not being able to send
information/papers to the Committee.      
 
6.         The Committee also decided to visit Bangalore to hear the representatives of some banks / financial institutions
tentatively from 13
th to 15th  January, 2004 on the subject of Gender Budget Analysis – Micro Credit to Women Self
Help Groups.  The Committee authorised the Chairman of the Committee for seeking permission of the Chairman Rajya
Sabha for the said visit.
 
7.         The Committee, then, adjourned at 4.30 p.m.
 
   