PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
HUNDRED EIGHTY-FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
PROMOTION OF SPORTS IN INDIA 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 30TH NOVEMBER, 2006) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 30TH NOVEMBER, 2006) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
NOVEMBER, 2006/AGRAHAYANA, 1928 (SAKA) 
C O N T E N T S 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE               
2.         PREFACE                                                                                           
3.         REPORT                                                                                 
I.          INTRODUCTION 
¾      Previous Studies/Reports 
¾     Main Issues/Problems 
¾      Sports Organistions in India 
        Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports 
        Sports Authority of India 
         Indian Olympic Association 
         National Sports Federations 
        State Level Organisations 
  
PART-I 
  
PROBLEMS AND ISSUES HAMPERING SPORTS 
II.                LACK OF SPORTS CULTURE 
¾      Generating sports consciousness  
¾      Integrating sports with educational curriculum 
¾      School Games Federation 
¾      Higher Education and Sports 
III.       INADEQUATE INCENTIVES & AWARDS  
¾      In Academics 
¾      In Government jobs 
¾      Cash Awards 
¾      In selections 
¾      Reviewing existing schemes 
IV.       RESOURCES FOR SPORTS 
¾    Meagre resources 
Page 1 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

¾    Enhancing Allocations
¾    Generating own resources 
¾      Public-Private Partnership 
¾      Prathmik Shiksha Kosh and Sports   
V.        NEED FOR ADEQUATE INFRASTRUCTURE 
¾      Lack of modern infrastructure 
¾      Decentralisation of infrastructure 
¾      Poor maintenance of infrastructure 
¾      Under-utilisation of infrastructure 
¾      Transferring infrastructure schemes  
VI.       TRAINING OF SPORTSPERSONS 
¾                  Need for modern training 
¾                  Dietary Allowance 
¾                  Lack of modern equipments 
VII.     PROBLEMS OF COACHING AND COACHES         
¾                  Shortage of Coaches 
¾                  Transfer of Coaches 
¾                  Withdrawal of SAI coaches from Districts 
¾                  Academic courses and trainings for coaches 
¾                  Working condition, etc. of coaches 
¾                 Contract Coaches 
VIII.    SPOTTING AND NURTURING TALENTS 
¾      SAI Schemes for spotting, training, etc. 
¾     Lack of adequate funds 
IX.       ROLE OF FEDERATIONS/ASSOCIATIONS 
¾                  Lack of coordination, monitoring, etc. 
¾                  Ensuring Professionalism & Accountability 
¾                  Last Minute Selection 
¾                  Prioritisation of disciplines for Olympics 
X.        SPORTS MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 
¾                  Sports Authority of India 
XI.       WOMEN’S PARTICIPATION 
XII.     DEVELOPMENT OF SPORTS SCIENCES 
XIII.   SCHEME FOR ANTI-DOPING 
XIV.    ROLE OF MEDIA 
XV.      PUTTING SPORTS IN CONCURRENT LIST 
XVI.    COMMONWEALTH GAMES 2010 
PART-II 
          PROBLEMS RELATING TO REGIONAL  AND OTHER CENTRES OF SPORTS
AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
XVII.   DR. SHYAMA PRASAD MOOKHERJEE SWIMMING POOL COMPLEX 
XVIII.   JAWAHARLAL NEHRU STADIUM, NEW DELHI 
Page 2 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

XIX.            SAI, REGIONAL CENTRE, GANDHINAGAR 
XX.        SAI, REGIONAL CENTRE, BANGALORE 
XXI.      SAI, REGIONAL CENTRE, BHOPAL 
XXII.     SAI SUB-CENTRE, KANDIVALLI 
XXIII.   WATER SPORTS COMPLEX, MURIKKUMPUZHA 
XXIV.   SAI TRAINING CENTRE, LAL BA HADUR SHASTRI STADIUM COMPLEX, 
KOLLAM 
XXV.    THE OPERATION GOLD SCHEME OF THE KERALA SPORTS COUNCIL, 
       THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 
XXVI.  LAKSHMIBAI NATIONAL COLLEGE OF  PHYSICAL EDUCATION (LNCPE), 
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM  
XXVII. SAI REGIONAL CENTRE, SALT LAKE CITY, KOLKATA 
XXVIII NORTH-EAST REGIONAL CENTRE, IMPHAL 
XXVIII.     SAI SUB-CENTRE, GUWAHATI 
XXIX.       CONCLUSION 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2006-07) 
                       
1.      Shri Janardan Dwivedi                                  Chairman 
  
            MEMBERS 
            RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.      Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah 
3.      Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
4.      Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani 
5.      Shri Laxminarayan Sharma 
6.      Smt. Brinda Karat 
7.      Shri S. Anbalagan
 
8.      Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
9.      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
10.  Shri Ali Anwar 
LOK SABHA 
11.  Shri Ashok Argal 
12.  Shri Basudeb Barman 
13.  Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
14.  Shri Harisinh Chavda 
15.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
16.  Shri R. L. Jalappa 
17.  Shri Ramswaroop Koli 
18.  Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
19.  Smt. Nivedita Sambha
jirao Mane
Page 3 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

20.  Smt. Archana Nayak 
21.  Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran 
22.  Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat 
23.  Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh 
24.  Shri Chengara Surendran 
25.  Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
26.  Shri K. Virupakshappa 
27.  Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
28.  Shri Francis K. George 
29.  Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
30.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
31.  Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh 
 (i) 
  
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary 
Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary 
Shri N.K. Singh, Director 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Committee Officer 
PREFACE
 
  
            I, the Chairman of the Depart ment-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee, do he reby present, on its behalf, this
Report of the Committee on the promot ion of sports in the country pe rtaining to Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports. 
2.         One of the mandates of the Department  related Committees is to study the subjects on the
Annual Report of the Ministry  under its jurisdiction. Th e subject of sports has always been a matter o f
great interest. This is not the first time the Committee has chosen  the sports as subject for its
deliberations. Way back in the year 1995, the Co mmittee has taken up I ndia’s performance in 
international sports as a subject for special study and presented the 34 th Report on the subject covering 
every aspect of sports. The Comm ittee further deliberated on wide range of issues concerning sports
again in 1998 vide its Action Taken Report (77 th Report) of the Committee. The Committee took up the
subject of sports in 2003 again in view of the fact that  most of its recommendations in 34 th and 77 th
Reports remain unimplemented. Th e Committee could however  not complete its deliberations on the
subject due to dissolution of 13 th Lok Sabha. In 2004, the newly cons tituted Committe e decided to 
continue the unfinished study on the sports since many developments in sports arena had taken place
including the decision to hold Commonwealth Games 2010 to our country. 
3.         For having a wider consultation on th e subject, the Committee decided to issue a Press
Communiqué with a view to invite views / suggestions from the general public. The Committee received
a number of memoranda / suggestions from individuals and organisations across the country.  
4.         The Committee heard the oral evidence of  the Secretary of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports along with the Dire ctor-General, Sports Authority of Indi a (SAI) on various issues at number o f
occasions. It also held discussions  with the former officials of th e SAI, sportspersons, coaches, sport
scientists in Delhi and outside to have the benef it of their views on the enti re gamut of sports. The
Committee also sought written replies from the Ministry on its questionnaires time and again. 
(iii) 
5.         The Committee also visited a number of SAI sports infrastructure / stadia and also the sports
complexes in a few States with a vi ew to make on-the-spot assessment of the sports scenario at different 
regional levels. Study reports of the visits to the Western Centre  and Southern Centre of SAI have been
Page 4 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

appended as Part II of the Report. 
6.         The Committee wishes to express its thanks  to the officers of the Mi nistry of Youth Affairs and
Sports, the officials of Sports Authority of India at Headquarters and regional centres for their support in
furnishing the material and informat ion required from time to time in  connection with the examination
of the subject and also making arra ngements for the visits of the Committee. Th e Committee take this
opportunity to express its thanks to  all individuals, instit utions, association, bodi es etc., who appeared
before the Committee and also those who submitte d memoranda on the subject . The Committee would
like to extend its thanks to the G overnment officials of the States fo r arranging the me etings during the
visits of the Committee.   
7.         The report was considered and a dopted by the Committee at its meeting held on 27 th September 
2006. 
  
             
(iv) 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1       Sports and games not only help in the al l-round development of human personality but are also 
healthy means for recreation and relaxation. They work as elixir both for human body and mind.  Sports
also provides opportunities for personal and social  interaction fostering goodwill and peace amongst
different peoples. It instills values such as healthy competition, respect for rules,  team spirit, instinct o f
turning failure into success, leading to excellence in human endeavour and at tainment.  It enhances
sense of achievement, national pride and patriotism amongst individuals. 
1.2       Successive Five Year Plans in India ha ve laid emphasis on sports and physical education. The
National College of Physical Edu cation and National Institute of S ports were established during the
Second Plan and sports f acilities like stadia, sw imming pools and open-air th eatres were constructed. 
The National Coaching Scheme wa s launched during the Third plan , while allocations for physical
education, games and sports were in creased during the Fourth Plan. Fi fth Plan witnessed the expansion
of the Coaching faci lities. The Sixth Plan la id emphasis on spotting a nd nurturing young talent in
different sports and also setting up of facilities at different pl aces for promising sportspersons.
Adventure sports were pr omoted during the Seventh Plan with emphasis laid on deve lopment of sports
infrastructure at the grassroot level that included laying of synthetic tracks, etc. The growth of sports got
an added impetus, when Governme nt created a separate Departme nt of Sports in 1984. A National
Sports policy was adopted in 1984 on the basis of which, a Plan of Action was formulated in 1992.
Many rural schools thereafter, were assisted in developing playgrounds and buying sports equipments.
Schemes like Special Area Games (SAG) and SPDA were launched with a view to locating and
nurturing children having potential for sports and to provide special training to sportspersons. Ninth Plan
also attempted to develop excellen ce in sports, provide modern & sc ientific facilities including sports
physiology and sports medicine etc.  Modern equipments relevant to the training needs of sportspersons
were also sought to be provided.  During this plan period, Department of Sports was converted into a
full-fledged Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports in May 2000.  
1.3       Despite these efforts made after Independence, performance of the country in international sports
has all along been very dismal in comparison to ma ny other countries.  It is  ironical that despite ou r
large size and huge population, we have not been able to achieve a respectable status in the world sports
scenario.  Instead, there has been  a continuous deterioration in In dia’s performance over the years, 
despite spending considerable amount of mone y and creatin g some basic infrastructure in the countr y.
NEW DELHI; 
September27, 2006 
Asvina 5,1928 (Saka) 
JANARDAN DWIVEDI 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development
Page 5 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

Our supremacy in hockey during the early decades of last century notwith standing, we have had
generally cloudy landscape of Indian  Sports.  For example, India ha s won 7 Olympic Gold (six from
1928-1956 and two in 1964 and 1980) a Silver (1960) and two Bronze (1968 and 1972).  The only other
medals in Olympics won by India are: Bronze by K.D Jadha v (1952), Leander Paes (1996), K
Mallesweri (2000) and latest bei ng a Silver by R.V.S. Rathore ( 2004). Although the achievements of
India in the Commonwealth Games 2002 and Asian Games, 2002 have shown some improvement, yet
we have a long way to go in this regard.  After every debacle in international sports, there starts a blame
game amongst various agencies responsible for pr omoting sports and then forgetting everything
afterwards. Such a poor performance by a country of more than 100 million people should be a matter of
debate and close introspection for not only the sports  administrators, policy-makers, Sports Federations, 
sportspersons but also amongst the people at large.  There is a need to sensitize everyone in this respect. 
Previous Studies & Reports 
1.4       Attempts have been made earlier to study and analyze the reasons for India’s dismal performance 
in international sports. Several co mmittees have so far been cons tituted by the Government for this
purpose. These Committees, no doubt, have come out with useful and practical
suggestions/recommendations, but it appears that these reports have remained on paper only, as there is
no perceptible change in the sports  scenario in the country.  The Committee would like to especially
mention its 34 th and 77 th Reports on the subject pres ented to both Houses of Parliament in the years 
1995 and 1998 respectively.  Most of the problems and issues identified by this Committee in these
Reports still remain the same; and very few of it s recommendations have ac tually been implemented. 
The Committee believes that it is probably the general inertia and re sistance inherent within the system
against any attempt to bring a bout change of any kind. The Comm ittee deprecates this tendency,
particularly in a system that is concerned with promoti ng sports and games. It emphasizes the need fo r
bringing about reforms in  sports management and governance ur gently to make it more dynamic,
responsive, responsible and result-oriented.      
1.5       It is in this backdrop that the Depa rtment-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development decided to take  up the subject of promotion of  sports once again for a special
study with a view to providing so me broad guideline s for improving sports scenario.  Wide-ranging 
discussions were held by the Committe e with all those connected with s ports, official and non-official.  
It also made on-the-spot vi sits of the existing sports facilities/in frastructure at differ ent places in the
country.  It also invite d written memoranda by issu ing public notices in news papers/television, which
provided lot of inputs for this study.  
Main Issues/Problems 
1.6       The main problems that came to the noti ce of the Committee, during its visits and deliberations
were: lack of sports culture and consciousness in th e country; non-integration of sports with education; 
multiplicity of agencies involved in promotion of sports with no coordination and accountability, lack of
proper cooperation amongst th e Centre, States, Federations/Associa tions and various private and public
sector undertakings; lack of infrastr ucture in the rural areas and its concentration in urban areas; under-
utilisation of available infrastructure and its poor maintena nce and upkeep; lack of good quality and
affordable sports equipments; absence of adequate incentives for the yout h to take up spor ts as a career;
need for effective schemes for  identification of talents; unfair selection procedure and last minute
finalisation of teams; lack of adequate exposure and specialised training/coaching of international
standard; non-availability of nutritious diet for sportspersons; inadequate participation of women in
sports, lack of com mitted administrators with love and knowledge about s ports; and that of modern
facilities for sports me dicines, psychology, etc.   And last but not least, inad equate allocation for sports
for a country of continental dimension is also one of the major factors for the existing state of affairs. 
  
Sports Organisations in India 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports 
1.7       A Department of Sports was set up in 1982 at the time of the 9 th Asian Games held in New 
Delhi.  It led to various develo pments such as establishment of S ports Authorit y of India and the
Page 6 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

formulation of National Youth Policy in 1984.  A fu rther impetus to these activities was given by the
creation of a separate Department of Youth Affairs and Sports in 1985, the International Youth Year.  In
the same year, initiative was also taken to form ulate the National Youth Policy which was adopted in
1988.  In the year 2000, this Department was upgraded as the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports.  The
Ministry works under the overall supervision and guidance of the a Union Minister of Youth Affairs and
Sports who is assisted by the Secretary of the Ministry.  Two officers in the rank of Joint Secretary head
the two Bureaus of the Mini stry, namely (i) Youth A ffairs and (ii) Sports.  There the Joint Secretary
(Sports), there are Director (Sports ) and Deputy Secretary (Sports).  There are four Under Secretaries
and other Officers and staff looking after the sports and physical education in the Ministry. 
  
Sports Authority of India 
  
1.8       Sports Authority of India, a society under Societies Registration Act, is an apex body responsible
for implementing a number of schemes for spotting and nurturing of sports talent, promotion of sports in
special areas, women’s sports, rural sports etc. in the country.  SAI is  also responsible for maintaining 
and utilizing stadia in Delhi. Its primary objective is to develop excellence in and broad basing of sports
at different levels.  It also coordi nates with NSFs in various discipli nes. It has six Regional Centres and
four Sub-Centres, some of which are yet to beco me operational. SAI, in addition has two academic 
wings - one for training coaches and research and development in sports  at the Netaji Subhash National
Institute of Sports, Patiala and th e other for Physical Education a nd Research & Development at the
Lakshmibai National College of Physical Education, Thiruvana nthapuram. SAI is managed by a
Governing Body under the Chairmanship  of the Union Minister, Youth Af fairs and Sports.  DG is the
Chief Executive Officer of the SAI.  SAI follows three fold approach for fulfilling its responsibilities:- 
Training of elite sportspersons;  
Talent scouting and training them (Junior, Sub-junior); and 
Adoption and excellence development (Senior level) 
  
Indian Olympic Association  
  
1.9       Indian Olympic Associat ion (IOA) supervises, as  well as coordinates, the functioning of the
State Olympic Associations and also guides the Na tional Sports Federations (NSF). Each NFS has its
affiliated State Sports Associations . Each State Sports Association, in turn, is supposed to have district
level associations, though at  present, very few such district le vel sports associa tions are functioning
effectively.  
National Sports Federations  
1.10     Individual disciplines are looked after by th e concerned National Sports  Federations recognized
by the Government. Financial assistance is give n to these Federations  for conducting national
championships and international tournaments in the country, organising co aching camps, procuring
equipments and sponsorships, enforcing the rules of the game, promoting th e game in general and
participation in international tour naments abroad. Federations are al so supposed to continuously scout
and nurture fresh talents. The sche me is implemented with the help of Sports Authority of India unde r
its relevant schemes.  
State Level Organisations  
1.11     Almost all State Government s have their Directorates of Sports . Besides, some States have also
set up Sports Authorities/Councils. Each State has a State Sports Association fo r each discipline and
they perform responsibilities simila r to those of NSFs. Every State is  also supposed to have a State
Olympic Association to oversee th e working of the State Associat ions and also to hold multi-
disciplinary tournaments/championships at the State level. 
Part-I 
PROBLEMS AND ISSUES HAMPERING SPORTS  
II          LACK OF SPORTS CULTURE
Page 7 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

Generating sports consciousness 
2.1       One of the major factors leading to such a dismal scenario in sports  and games is the lack o f
sports culture in the country at every level.  There is a general lack of sports consciousness in our society
- the parents, teachers, policy-makers, administrators, peoples’ representatives, etc.  General perception 
is that sports is a digression fr om academics.  Sports and games, in fact, help children in thei r
development – physical and mental.   This can be attained by bringing about a change in the parental and 
societal attitude towards the sports. 
2.2       For this, the Committee feels, that all out effort will have to be made  by everyone of us at every
level in every walk of life;  gove rnment alone would not be able to do this.  A national campaign fo r
generating consciousness about spor ts will have to be launched.  NGOs and local elected bodies, the
Committee believes, could play an ef fective role in this regard.  Such  a campaign may start, of course,
with Government patronage at the grassroot level, say from Aanganwadi Centres, primary schools, local
clubs, Mahila Mandals of NYKS, Re sident Welfare Associations, Gram  Panchayats, Municipal Bodies,
etc.  
Integrating sports with educational curriculum 
2.3       Another important aspect of such a campa ign/effort would be to i nvolve the parents in a big
way.  This can be done only when the sports and phys ical education are integr ated with educational
curriculum making it a co mpulsory subject upto secondary leve l and incorporating sports in the
evaluation system of the students.  Lack of social recognition and econo mic security in sports, in fact,
dissuades students and parents from opting sports as  a career.  Stories about penury of some of ou r
former sportspersons deter them to take to sports.  The Committee feels, that unless the sports becomes a
premier category in job mark et - government and private, parents/students will  not be attracted to it at 
all.  Industry and private corporations alongwith the government will have to give adequate weightage to
sports and physical  education, while making recruitments fo r them.  Sportspers ons are known to have
been successful managers/employees due to obvious reasons.  
2.4       Participation in games and sports fosters qualities like sportsmanship, fairness, team spirit, etc. in
the children that makes them ideal citizens.  The Co mmittee finds that integrating sports with education
is an old demand; even this Committee it self had underlined this point in its 34 th report submitted in the 
year 1995.  The Committee is of the view that this needs to be done  urgently.  The Committee strongly
recommends that immediate effort s be made with the help of De partment of Secondary and Highe r
Education, CBSE, State Boards of Education and th e Ministry of Yout h Affairs and Sports.  If the need
be, the matter could be put before the CABE also. 
2.5       The Committee feels that sports and games should be made comp ulsory from the primary
school.  The watchwords, in fact, s hould be “Catch them young and take sports to the gr assroot level”. 
The Committee is of the view that  by making physical education an in tegral part of the educational
curriculum, broad-basing of sports would be done automati cally. A physical fitness programme shoul d
be drawn and implemente d in the schools and colleges across th e country to sensitize every child/youth
about the value of fitnes s and good health, so that they become more disciplined as well as productive
human beings. 
School Games Federation 
2.6       The Committee was concerned to learn that the School Games Federation was not functioning
due to some dispute and the matter was sub-judice.   Last Long-Term De velopment Plan (LTDP) 
meeting of the Federation was held on 8.5.2003 and since then no central assistance has been released to
the Federation.  The Committee wants the Ministry of Youth Affairs & S ports to intervene in the matte
r
to try and settle the problem out of Court so that the Federation starts working without further delay. 
   
Higher Education and Sports 
2.7       Sports activities in the colleges & uni versities are hardly to be seen now-a-days.  The 
Association of Indian Universiti es (AIU), the apex body, is also  not making adequate efforts fo r
promotion and development of sports in colleges /universities. Only a fe w universities may have
adequate sports facilities for grooming them on scientific lines. Inte r-universities sports and games have 
Page 8 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

become things of the past  and are hardly held now-a-days. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommends that 
the Government should, through UGC and Association of Indian  Universities (AIU) launch a
nationwide strategy for increasing spor ts activities in the universities.  An Inter-University Sports Boar d 
or such a body should be set up in every State so as to organize/s upport sports activities in the
universities and the colleges in a phased manner with the help and support from AIU. 
2.8       The Committee notes that under the two cent rally sponsored schemes of  'Grant to rural schools
for purchase of sports equipment and development of play ground' an d for ‘Promotion of sports in 
universities and colleges’, central assistance is pr ovided.   The Committee is , however, constrained to
observe that benefit of these two schemes are not even ly spread in the different States.   Some of the
States in remote and inaccessible areas seem to have remained uncovered by these schemes as indicated
in the funding pattern for the last th ree years.   What is more worrisom e is the decision to transfer these
schemes to the State sector w.e.f.  1.4.06.  States so far actively involve d will stand deprived.    The
Committee is of the opinion that sc hools, colleges and universities are the ideal places for spotting and
nurturing sports talent and they shoul d continue to be so.   The Commi ttee, therefore, strongly feels that
there is an urgent need for review of these two schemes and retaining their central character. 
III        INADEQUATE INCENTIVES AND AWARDS  
3.1       Incentives and awards, financial and othe rs, not only provide recogniti on and social security to
sportspersons, but also motivate others to take up sports with intere st and seriousness.  At present, there
are very few incentives/rewards even for our talented and outst anding sportspersons including the
former sportspersons. The Central Government, the State Governments and the Public Secto r
Undertakings do not offer good job opportunities for our sportspersons. Corporate sector also does not
have attractive offers for them.  It is shameful to find some of  our former sports person who have
brought laurels to the country, selli ng tea/chat, etc on roadside stalls  to earn their daily bread.  The
Committee feels that in order to pr omote sports in the country we ne ed to provide adequate incentives,
good job opportunities, economic security and social  recognition to our budding, as well as existing
sportspersons, so that the youth – our greatest asset is attracted to sports. 
            Incentives and their support to our fo rmer sportspersons including pension is highly inadequate. 
The Committee is of the opinion th at former sportspersons particul arly the aged ones need to be
supported in a big way for which government must put a proper system in place at the earliest. 
In Academics 
3.2       As has been said elsewhere, students, w ho have inclination for sports , are put to disadvantage in
academics, as they have to spar e more time for sports. This af fects their academic performance
adversely.  Sometimes they are unable to get admission in educational in stitutions.  As a result, children
desist from taking up sports.  The Committee feels that to make up for this loss, the students who
perform well in sports should be given some compensatory marks in academics. Similarly, certain
percentage of seats for admission in  professional and other institutions /colleges should be reserved fo r
students who have achieved a certain level in sports. 
In Government jobs 
3.3       As regards, employing sportspersons in government, semi-government and private bodies and 
institutions, existing position is quite disheartening. There are no sp ecific rules/guidelines for this
purpose and even where these exist, there is a gene ral lack of will to imp lement those guidelines (o f
employing sportspersons) by the Government. For ex ample, the existing guidelines of the Central
Government to employ 5 percent of group C&D employees from amongst the outstanding sportspersons
are not being observed by the various  Ministries and Departments.  It is disheartening to note that
neither the Ministry of Sports nor  the Ministry of Pers onnel had a ready database , Ministry-wise, to 
show the position of sportspersons employed in this category into different Ministries/Departments.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry/D epartment-wise position ma y be obtained and given 
to the Committee within three m onths for its consideration.  The Committee disapproves the idea o f
making reservation for eminent sportspersons in onl y group C and D and not in A&B groups also.  It is
insensitive to employ eminent/international sportspersons as class three and class four employees. 
 Cash Awards 
Page 9 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

3.4       There is a provision for giving cash awards  to outstanding sportspers ons after they win medals
and bring laurels to the country.  The Committee notes that these cash  rewards are given to only those
who win medals in international events such as Olympics, Asian Games and Commonwealth Games.  It
is not given to other outstanding sportspersons.  Th ese awards, the Committee was informed, sometimes
take a long time due to long and rigi d procedures.  It creat es avoidable hardships to the sportspersons. 
The Committee, therefore, emphasizes the need for increasing the num bers of cash awards by extending
it to outstanding performance at nati onal/international performances, even if they failed to win medals. 
This recognition will keep their morale and spir it high.  The amount of cash  awards also needs to be
enhanced suitably. 
In selections 
The Committee’s attention was drawn towards allege d unfair selection of eminent sportspersons fo r
Arjuna Awards/Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna Awards, Dronacharya awards , etc.  Such allegations, the
Committee feels, point directly towa rds lack of transparency as well as  specific norms in the selection
process.  The Committee, therefor e, recommends that the select ion process for these awards be
streamlined for making it more part icipatory, objective and fair with  no scope for any interference,
political or otherwise.   
                        The Committee emphasizes the need for taking adequate precaution to avoid
discrimination of any type in making selection either for awards or for participating I a particular event. 
Reviewing existing schemes 
3.6       As regards the scheme for assisting promising sportspersons and supporting personnel (such as
coaches, sports scientists, etc.), the Committee wa s informed that its impl ementation was riddled with
many problems like multiplicity of agencies and procedural complicati ons.  As a result, the benefits o f
the scheme are not reaching to the sportspersons on ti me.  The Committee feels that this is a very good
scheme, which needs to be implemented in right earnest by removing the hurdles faced in implementing
the scheme smoothly.   
IV.       RESOURCES FOR SPORTS 
Meagre resources 
4.1       As per records available,  Plan Allocations for Sports from VI th to X th F i v e  Y e a r  P l a n  i s  a s  
under:- 
                        VIth Plan           = Rs. 26.54 crore 
            VIIth Plan         = Rs. 207.45 crore 
                        VIIIth Plan        = Rs. 210.00 crore 
                        IXth Plan           = Rs. 472.61 crore 
                        Xth Plan            = Rs. 1145.36 crore 
             
            The committee notes that there is a ju mp in Plan Allocation from VI Plan to VII Plan due to
increased allocation for creation of rural infrastructure  facilities.  However, this increase, the Committee
feels, has not been commensurate with the requirements as rural ar eas are still not having sufficient
sports infrastructure.  
             
4.2       The Committee noted the following details of budgetary allocations for Ministry of Sports during
last five years : 
                                                                                                           (Rs. in crores) 
  
Year BE RE Actual 
2002-03 177.67 177.67 177.06 
2003-04 262.67 227.12 222.75 
2004-05 279.50 265.13 185.57 
2005-06 312.79 292.41 N.A. 
2006-07 443.69 N.A N.A 
Page 10 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

4.3       It may be seen that allocation made to the Ministry in 2005-06, cons tituted just 0.98 per cent o f 
the entire Budget of the G overnment of India. In other words, num erically it comes to Rs. 4 per person
annually. The Committee considers it disappointi ngly low in view of the poor and inadequate
facilities/infrastructure in a vast country like ours,  40 per cent of which constitute the youth.   
The Committee, during its visit to various SAI centers/Ins titutes, Stadia and ot her infrastructure in
different States and also during it s discussions with various persons connected with sports, noted that
there was a general complaint regarding the in adequacy of funds no t only for creating more
infrastructure and upgrading the existing ones, but also for their maintenance and upkeep. The paucity of
funds, in fact, appeared to be one of the major c onstraints, both at the Cent re and in the States, in
developing and promoting sports activities.  Due to paucity of f unds, our schools and colleges are not
able to provide even the basic equipments and in frastructure required for sports and games. Non-
availability of basi c sports equipments and pl ay fields for our young ones is also one of the majo r
drawbacks in promoting sports in the country.  
Enhancing Allocations 
4.5       The Committee understands that the overa ll economic crunch may make  it difficult to spare
enough resources for the developmen t of sports, in view of more basic needs like water, housing,
education, health etc.  The Committee however feels that to achieve the objectives envisaged in the
Tenth Plan approach paper and to br ing Indian sports at a desirable level, a majo r hike in the outlay fo r
sports is highly imperative. A mul ti-sectoral approach needs to be adopted fo r resource mobilization by 
tapping other sources to promote and develop sports in the country. 
4.6       The Committee feels that in the prevai ling situation, the responsib ility for providing bulk o f
resources for this purpose falls mainly on the Govern ment only. The Committee is  of the view that the
Government should make a ll-out efforts for mobilizing adequate  resources for promoting sports an d
games in the country.  The Commi ttee also recommends that the Pl anning Commission and Ministry o f
Finance should take a more realistic view of the fi nancial needs of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports and provide them more resources.  To begi n with the Government should provide at least 2.0 pe r
cent of the total Annual Budget of the Government of India for sports only.  
Generating own resources 
4.7       The Committee, no doubt, is aware of the general resource constraint in the country but feels that
less than 1% of the total Budget  allocated for sports is too m eagre  to expect any spectacula r
achievements. The Committee was in formed that SAI was generating some resour ces of their own by
way of renting out their stadia/bui ldings etc. The Committee feels th at there are many other sources o f
collecting/generating revenue for the purpose, but not much has been done in this regard so far. 
4.8       The governmental efforts so far made to pr omote sports have not yielded the desired results. The
Committee found that although various agencies were involved in the promotion of sports, most of them
received funds from the States.  Most of the s ports federations and associations do not have any
resources of their own. In the l ong run, however, these associations /federations should also try to
generate some revenue to beco me economically independent. That , the Committee feels, would help
them exercise their autonomy and authority. 
Public-Private Partnership 
4.9       The Committee is of the view that the Government alone would not be able to afford the required
financial resources for promoting spor ts.  In view of this, public as we ll as the private sector need to
supplement the governmental effort s. The Committee, therefore, em phasizes the need for a joint and
coordinated approach by including public and private sector, in pooling their resources to promote sports
in the country. This is more so necessary in the cont ext of the financial constraints, both at the Central
and State levels. 
4.10     As regards private contribution for this pur pose, efforts made by the Government have proved to
be a damp squib.  The National Sports Development Fund se t up earlier could not attract contribution
despite having 100% exemption from Income-tax.  De spite several requests a nd meetings, the response
of corporate houses was quite lukewarm.  It appe ars to the Committee that  the issue of private
participation was dealt with purely in bureaucratic manner without addressin g the concerns of the
Page 11 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

corporate houses.  As a result, it did not evoke the de sired response.  The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that this issue be di scussed afresh with the corporate houses and a scheme  be chalked out
in consultation with them.  Th e Committee is aware that many corporate houses have contributed
directly or indirectly for sports and many more are willing to do it.  But they do not come forward due to
various reasons.  A policy/scheme that has their participation, the Com mittee is sure, would certainly be
fruitful and effective. 
4.11     The Committee recommends that major i ndustrial/corporate houses ma y be requested to adopt
one sports discipline for promoti ng in a particular area including sc outing and nurturing talent in that
discipline. They may be encouraged to establis h in-house training and R& D facilities and ensuring 
participation in various national and internat ional events. The Government may consider suitable tax
holidays and other exemptions to the industrial houses for investment in the sports. 
Prathmik Shiksha Kosh and Sports  
4.12     The Committee appreciates increased allo cations being made for popul ar Schemes like Sarva
Shiksha Abhiyan and Mid-Day Meal (SSA and MDM) in our schools.  The Committee is of the firm 
view that unless the sports and th e physical education are integrated into educational curricula, sports
cannot get the required popularity amongst our children and their parents.  In other words, education and
sports will have to be  inextricably linked.  That being so, allocation particular ly, for elementary
education must be spent on sports and games in schools.  The Commit tee, therefore, recommends that
sports and games be included as one of the components in Sarva Siksha Abhiyan.   Not only Mid-Day 
Meal, sports and games in school, th e Committee feels, would be e qually attractive for increasing 
enrollment in our school and also restraining them from dropping out. 
V.                    NEED FOR ADEQUATE  INFRASTRUCTURE 
5.1       The issue of sports infrastructure receiv ed focused attention of th e Committee during this study.
Given the current level of high demand, we need to build-up a country-wide world class infrastructure to 
attract and groom the potential s portspersons.  The Committee could get an overview of infrastructure
and facilities – existing and upcomi ng during its on-the-spot visits to the various centres run by the SAI 
in different regions of the country.  The Committee did see not only the status of infrastructure, but also
interacted with eminent sportspersons, former sportspersons coaches, s ports scientists, sports
administrators, etc. officials of Sports Association/Federation, the Ministry and SAI on this issue.  Based
on the feedback received during its visits and deliberations, the Co mmittee found that the issue o f
infrastructure has three aspects: (i) need for new and modern infras tructure (ii) maintenance/upkeep o f
the existing infrastructure and facili ties; and (iii) optimum utilization of  the infrastructure. In fact the
issue of sports infrastructure in the country revolves around these basic parameters. 
Lack of modern infrastructure 
5.2       Availability of modern infrastructure for sports is vital both for ma ss participation as well as
development of excellence in sports.  The Co mmittee found that the infrastructure of international
standards was not available in India even to the elite sportspersons.  The Government of India has
sought to provide f acilities and infrastructure in various parts of the c ountry through its different
schemes, namely, centres of excell ence, special area games,  SAI training centres,  National sports talent
contest, Army Boys Sports Company, etc.  But their geographical spread is highly inadequate for a huge
country like India.  Even the existing infrastructu re at these places were poorly maintained and many o f
these required immediate replacemen t/upgradation.  Several of these did not have s ynthetic track fo r
athletics or the surface for hocke y or indoor multi-pur pose halls or swimmi ng pool.  The regional 
centres of the Sports Authority of India, which are the centres of excellence also were found to be
lacking in many regards as far as infrastructure is c oncerned.  This aspect has been dealt with separately
in Part-II of this Report.  
5.3       We need to prioritize the games/sports fo r this purpose in coming year s. To begin with, we may
patronize games such as kho-kho, kabaddi, football, volleyball, basketball, etc, that do not require much
infrastructure and expenditure. S econd priority can be the discip lines like boxing, wrestling, shooting
etc. in which our sportspersons have been gi ving good performance. Disc iplines like athletics,
swimming and gymnastics provide majority of medals in inte rnational events and participation of ou r
Page 12 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

sportspersons in such events could enlarge the scope of our medal tally. Our best  athletes must be given
maximum exposure to these even ts at international level. Our infrastructure needs to be
expanded/strengthened on the basis of such priorities decided by ourselves. 
5.4       The Committee feels that Government should plan the development of sports in a phased manner
so that scarce resources earmarked for the pur pose are optimally utilized  and necessary basic
infrastructure is built up over a period of time.  To begin with, there should be provision of a playfield in
each school and colleges in rural, as well as urban areas. The Comm ittee emphasizes the need to have
district level stadia and other infr astructure directly under the manage ment of district boards.  Where it
is not possible to have such se parate playfields in the urban areas for want of  space, a group o f
schools/colleges could be allowed to use a common playfield at differ ent timings.  It should however be
made mandatory for the builders and the housing so cieties to provide a playfield in every housing
complex for the residents. 
Lack of sports infrastructure in Rural Areas 
5.5       The Committee found that the existing sports  infrastructure, was mainly  confined to urban area
like big cities, industrial townships, defence cantonm ents, etc. that catered to the needs of the people
living in the big cities and urban ar eas.  The organized sports is, ther efore, generally limited to urban
areas.  As a result, around 80 per cent of the popul ation, which lives in the rural and tribal areas,
generally remains deprived of even the basic sports facilities. In fact , most of our efforts to develop
sports, the Committee notice d, have so far been concentrated in  urban areas only, and the rural areas
have remained altogether neglected. We have also not been able to provide even simple play fields in all
our schools and residential locations, not to speak of more. The children in rural areas use the dry fields
as playground and tree branch as hockey stick and cricket bat.  We ha ve, thus, failed to encourage the
rural children/youth to ensure mass participation in sports. There is no dearth of potential in rural areas;
what we require today is a concer ted approach for creating at least basic facilities a nd providing basic
sports equipments in the rural areas.  
5.6       With the decentralization of powers and resources to panchayats an d Nagarpalikas, Government
should not find it difficult to pr ovide sports facilities at Gram Panchayat, Block, smaller towns and
District levels.  Sports competitio ns and championships can also be held periodically at these levels. 
Such a broad- basing of sports facilities wo uld automatically help in scou ting talent at an early age
because it is easier to train the young ones.  Panchayat and Nagarpalikas should be mandated and
encouraged to take up this responsibility. 
5.7       As regards, infrastructure, a pyramidical approach needs to be adopted. First the base has to be
enlarged. Major initiatives will have to be taken in creating playgrounds in rural and tribal areas at Block
and District levels instead of building huge stadia in  big cities. It is equally  important that the rural
population is encouraged to participat e in sports and use th e facilities provided to them to acquire skills
of modern games and sports. We must  endeavour to ensure that millio ns of children were not deprived
of opportunity to participate in sports due to lack of infrastructure.  Victor s come out of participants
only. We need to convert our huge  youth manpower (around 40 per cent  of total population) as ou r
greatest strength. 
5.8       It has also been observed that State Governments want to organi ze national or State level
competitions in the State capitals only. Generally, th is results in the construction of huge stadia and
concentration of sporting activiti es at the State headquarters. Th e Committee feels that instead o f
organizing the games at the State capitals, many of th e games could be held in other places in the State,
so that the sports infrastructure is not concentrated in one particul ar area. This would bring about the
much-needed distribution of infrastructures all over the State. Thus, more a nd more people would have 
easy access to these infrastructures within their own State.  
Poor maintenance of infrastructure 
5.9       The Committee during its on-the-spot vi sits to SAI and State in frastructure found that 
maintenance and upkeep of the existing infrastructur e and facilities were generally in a very poo r
condition.  NIS, Patiala and Regional Centre at Bangalore may be made exceptions in this regard.  Some
centres did not have athletic track, if there was one, it was 15-20 years old.  Hockey Astroturf either was 
Page 13 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

not there or had outlived.  So was the case with swimming pool, indoor halls, fitness centres, etc. 
Position in this regard at differe nt places visited by the Committee has been given in detail in Part-II o f 
the Report.  
5.10     The Committee was informed that the poor maintenance of infrastructure/stadia/sports
complexes was mainly due to (i) lack  of resources and (ii) multiplicit y of agencies responsible for the
maintenance. The Government intends to go to th e Planning Commission with a request for additional
funds for the maintena nce of stadia/sports complexes. The Mini stry of Sports has been so far placing
funds at the disposal of  different agencies like DDA, NDMC and CPWD for the entire maintenance
work. However, given the poor maintenance of our infrastructure the Committee is not happy with level
of interaction and monito ring between Ministry and other agencies on the maintenance aspect of ou r
sports infrastructure.  
5.11     While deposing before the Committee the DG, SAI admitted that maintenance and upkeep of our
infrastructure at various places l eave much to be desired.  Accordi ng to him, SAI had a shoe-string 
budget for this purpose. SAI just gets  Rs.39 crores for maintenance, out of which 18.5 crores is SAI's
own earning. The budget was very sm all and as a result, the maintena nce had to be done from non-plan 
budget. The Government while computing SAI's share under non-plan budge t deducts the revenue 
generated by SAI and thus only 18 to 20 crores are allotted to SAI under non- plan. The budget was, in 
fact, too small to maintain 58 SAI Training Centres 6 Regional Centres and all the stadia in Delhi. He
informed the Committee that SAI did not have any engineering wing, it therefore, had to depend for this
purpose on the private agencies. He further submitted that SAI required an engineering wing to enhance
their capability rather than depe nding on agencies such as NDMC and CPWD.  In view of the position
explained above, the Committee feels that the amount available to SAI for maintenance of infrastructure
facilities is quite small th at should be enhanced substantially to meet the requirements in this regard. 
The Committee does not approve of shifting the bl ame to NDMC and CPWD for poor maintenance; it
should be basically SAI’s responsib ility to get work from them.  If  there are some problems relating to
control and monitoring in th e existing system, such issues could be  resolved with th eir headquarters. 
The Committee strongly feels that id eal position would be a separate engineering wing for SAI.   The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that  the Ministry should initiate acti on in this direction.    Setting
up of a separate engineering wing for SAI would result  in timely completion of all maintenance work of
SAI.  
Under-utilisation of infrastructure 
5.12     Optimum utilisation of our ex isting sports infrastructure has al so been one of areas of concern
before the Committee.  We have erected huge stadia a nd other sports infrastructure in the metros and
cities, which are used only when national or internat ional tournaments take pl ace. For the rest of the
period, stadia remain unutilized or are rented out for cultural programmes and other non-sporting events. 
The public at large generally does not  have access to such huge stadia. A lot of money is being spent on
their maintenance including security.  Sports Fede rations and other bodies having offices there, do not
pay the rent also.  Besides, excelle nt infrastructure is created in di fferent States by way of organizing
National Games there.  The Committ ee came to know that these generally  remain idle most part of the
year and States found it di fficult to maintain.  The Committee fi nds it ironical that  on the one hand, we
suffer from massive lack of infrastructure and on th e other hand, our infrastruc ture remains un-utilized 
or under-utilized.  This is an unfor tunate situation that needs to be  corrected.  The Committee strongly
recommends to have a plan prepared for this pur pose in consultation with all the State governments,
Federations, SAI, etc. for putting our infrastructure to maximum use. 
Transferring infrastructure schemes to States 
5.13     Sports infrastructure in our country ha s witnessed another development of far reaching
implications i.e. .the recent decision of Planning Commission to transfer four schemes viz. (i) Grants for 
Creation of Sports Infrastructure (ii) Grants to Rural Schools for Pu rchase of Sports Equipment and
Development of Playground (iii ) Grants for a promotion of Sports in Universiti es and colleges and (iv)
Grants for Installation of Synt hetic Playing Surfaces to the St ates.  The Committee has some
reservations about this move.  The resource crunch in the states is not a hidden fact and transfer of these
Page 14 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

infrastructure schemes will put additional burden on thei r already scarce fina nces.  Committee’s 
apprehension is based on assessmen t of ground realities.   One ex ample  would be enough.   For ou r
North Eastern States nurturing hidden sports talent, 34 infrastructure projects were sanctioned during the
period from 2000-01 to 2004-05 with 16 projects not receiving even a single paisa of central assistance  
Fate of the remaining projects is no different because of very  meager release of cen tral funds.   What is
more disturbing is that the exact  status of construction of all th ese on-going  projects as on 31.1.2006 is 
not available in the Ministry.   Reason being that State Governments can avail of central assistance by
submitting progress reports, ut ilization certificates etc. within two years from th e date of issue of the
approval.   Apparently, States we re having some inherent constraint s in implementing these projects as
per the prescribed norms.  If the id ea is to leave infrastructure de velopment to the States and Centre
responsible for promoting excellence, future of sports  in India, the Committee fe els, is going to be quite
grim.  States have several comp eting demands on their resources where sports and games do not get
priority.  The Committee feels that these schemes are not going to sustain without financial assistance to
the States. The Government needs to devise an alte rnative to sustain these schemes.  The Committee
hopes that the Planning Commission would help out the States by e nhancing the Stat es’ annual outlay 
for sports to enable them to run these schemes succe ssfully in the overall inte rest of the sports.  The
committee is of the considered opinion that all th e on-going infrastructure schemes being run by the 
Centre prior to its transfer to St ate must continue to be  funded by the Centre t ill these are completed. 
This is all the more important in  view of the growing demand of infrastructure for forthcoming
prestigious events of Commonwealth Games 2010 and other international games that our country is
planning to host. 
VI.       TRAINING OF SPORTSPERSONS 
Need for modern training 
6.1       During its interaction with sportspersons , the Committee found that one  of the major reasons fo r
India’s poor performance in sports  was the lack of modern and tim ely training to our sportspersons.
Sportspersons in India, the Committee was informe d, are given training ba rely a couple of months
before the commencement of the competitions. In c ountries like China and Japan, the teams are trained
all through the year. In Germ any, sportspersons are scie ntifically selected betw een 6 to 8 years of age.
Initial years are devoted to general training to develop their athleticism.  Later, they are assessed to find
out in which particular discipline they are likely to excel and are pr ovided specific training for a period
of 8 to 10 years before they start representing their country in vari ous international tournaments. The
training system in the country, the Committee feels, needs to be re-oriented in keeping with our growing 
demand and fast changing techniques with adequate scientific back- up.  All sports have become high-
tech today; not depending only on stamina and strength.  The new traini ng system will have to take all
such concern into notice. 
6.2       The Committee is of the opinion that training forms the core of  good performance. Champions
cannot be produced by training the sportspersons just  for few months before the actual competition. 
Sports training is a systematic process extending over a long period of time.  
Dietary Allowance 
6.3       Availability of nutriti ous diet and food is one of the basi c requirements of any sportsperson to
gain strength and stamina, without which, it is not possible to excel in sports. Sportspersons should get
the diet that has necessary calor ific requirements for different games and sports in which they
participate.  The Committee is happy to note that it has been decide d to increase the dietary amount in
the SAI Schemes of STC, SAG to Rs. 100 per day a nd Rs.150 for the inmates of the scheme of Centre
for Excellence.  The Committee, however, feels that in view of recent price hike of food items, even this
enhanced amount would not be sufficient for world-class sportspersons.    
6.4       The Committee is of the firm opinion that  the Government should still consider raising dietary
amount substantially so that players can get a rich  and nutritious diet. The amount of diet allowance
should be periodically reviewed in the light of price escalations from time to time.  It, therefore, needs to
be made to minimum Rs. 250/- per person/per day. The Committee would like the Government to devise
a system of evaluating the nature and quality of diet required to be given to our sportspersons. 
Page 15 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

Lack of modern equipments 
6.5       Availability of sports equipment is a nother important component of  training. Our sportspersons
have to suffer not only due to inad equate supply of equipments but al so delay in their availability on
account of various reasons. SAI has six Regional Ce ntres and five sub-centre s for preparing Indian 
teams for Olympics and other international comp etitions.  Certain equipm ents provided by SAI are
required to be imported, which is a time consuming process. The cust oms duty on such imports is also
quite high. The indigenous equipments are not always of  required quality and not  even used in national
competitions. Shooting has been worst affected due to these factors.  
6.6       The Committee recommends that Gove rnment should make effort s to arrange the latest
technology for manufacturing the equipments indi genously. The cost of s ports equipments, the
Committee was told are very high which makes them unaffordable.  Even those equipments
produced/manufactured in India beco me costly due to high excise dut y on those items.  Sports goods
industry in India has been demanding for reducti on of duties levied on goods produced indigenously. 
The Ministry of Finance, therefore, should be approached for rationalizing the excise and import duty on
sports equipments so that  not only quality of indige nous sports goods can be improved, their cost could
also be brought down upto an affordable level. 
  
VII.     PROBLEMS OF COACHING AND COACHES         
7.1       SAI presently has 1438 coaches as agai nst 1623 coaches in 1996. The shortfall of coaches was
due to death, retirement, superannuation, voluntary retirement, etc. The co aches are recruited by
advertising vacancies as per the cr iteria followed for selection of coaches by a Sele ction Committee as
provided in recruitment rule s. Ten per cent of the vacancies in Grade II coaches are filled by direct
recruitment of world championship and Olympic participants. Foreign coaches are also engaged on the
recommendation of the concerned National Sports Federation by a Committee constituted by the
Government. The Committee examines  the bio-data and previous ach ievements of foreign coaches an d
after due verification, recommends the names of identified /selected foreign coac hes to the Government
for approval. Foreign coaches have been recommended in the fields of Athletics, Football, Archery,
Table Tennis, Wrestling, Shooting, Volleyball and Badminton.  
7.2       On a query as to how the different kinds  of techniques were used by the coaches and whethe r
SAI provided any refresher course for them, DG, SAI informed the Committee that SAI was conducting
refresher courses and it made consis tent efforts to up-grade the skills  of the coaches. Coaches were also 
sent for training in institutions abroad. However, SA I was short of coaches as most of them were geared
to one or the other national camps . DG, SAI conceded that  there were 14 to 15 disciplines for which
Government was paying heavy amount  to the foreign coaches. Gove rnment was however committed to
optimally utilise their services and it has now been made mandatory th at foreign coaches will also hold
clinics for Indian coaches so that their skills were up-graded.  
Shortage of Coaches 
7.3       The Committee notes that about fifteen hundred coaches to cover the whole country is highly
inadequate. In the absence of any recruitment fo r coaches since 1992, the number of coaches has further
declined over years. The Committee feels that there is no dearth of coaching talent in our country.  Ou r
coaches, if given proper exposure and opportunities in terms of trai ning, can produce better results than
foreign coaches. There may have be en marginal improvement in our performance after engagement o f
foreign coaches but there have been  other areas of concer ns like language problem and increase in dope
cases. We need to depute our coach es for trainings at internationa l level. We can also improve the
standard of our coachi ng and ensure a better secured envi ronment for our coaching community by
providing healthy social security and better avenues of advancement.  This would not only enhance the
level of their coaching but also reduce our expenditure on fo reign coaches to some extent. The
Committee would like the government to urgently st art the recruitment proce ss for coaches in view o f
increased demand for the forthcoming Asian and Commonwealth Games. 
Transfer of Coaches 
7.4       The transfer of coaches has been one of  the most debatable issues  before the Committee. The
Page 16 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

mass transfer of more than 700 SA I coaches in June 2005, received lot of  criticism from different
quarters.  On being asked, the Director-General, SAI explained to the Comm ittee that under National 
Coaching Scheme two coaches per di strict were given to the States  but after inspection, the SIU o f
Ministry of Finance found that the system of providing District  level coaches by the SAI was not
functioning properly.  It, therefore, decided to withdraw SAI coaches in phases. This mass transfer, he
said, was the result of need for their relocation.  Th is, the Committee feels, does hardly justify such a
mass transfer of coaches. The Committee terms it  a hasty decision taken without visualizing its
repercussions.  Abrupt withdrawal of coaches ha s created a genuine hue and cry amongst the affected
ones.  This has, in fact, affected both the coaches as well as sports persons.  The Committee is of the
opinion that the coaching community n eeded a better treatment.  Transf ers appear to have been effected
without keeping in mind the interest  of the sports leave alone the ge nuine difficulties of the coaches. 
The Committee is of the consider ed opinion that this happened prim arily because SAI does not have a
definite transfer policy for coaches, hence no transparency.  Even these transfers had been done after a
long time and when it was done, 700 coaches were displaced suddenly in one go.  The Committee
recommends that SAI must put a transfer policy in place with no further delay.  The SAI should also
consider requests of those coaches who have genuine problems.   
7.5       Another flaw with our coaching management has been the placement of SAI coaches particularly
after the said transfers.  Coaches have been transf erred where they are not re quired or to a place where
their discipline is not there. The Committee was informed that some of the SAI coaches are positioned at
one center for years together whil e some other keep on shuttling fro m place to place every year. There
are even coaches deputed to other assignments in laboratories, offices, libraries, etc. Such discrimination
causes demotivation and rese ntment amongst the coaches.  The Committee recommends that
Government should immediately wit hdraw coaches from such meani ngless assignments and place them
in their respective areas of activities without further loss of time. 
Withdrawal of SAI coaches from Districts 
7.6       The SAI coaches were posted in the dist ricts coaching centres and other sports institutions in
different States for upgrading skil ls of promising trainees.  The Committee was informed about the
negative points of this scheme as: leaving the coaches to thei r fate at the DCCs; absence o f
supervisory/monitoring mechanism of  their performance; lack of accou ntability; lot of State-wise 
disparities; little contribution to the objective of excellence; lack of a policy regarding utilization of such
courses; etc.  The Committee wa s informed that an evaluation t eam of Government  of India had
recommended for withdrawal of such  coaches from the DCCs in the St ates and it has since been done,
necessitating large scale transfers of coaches last year.  The Committee also feels that Sports being in the
State List, States implem ent their own policies a nd programmes for promoting sports. The policy o f
posting SAI coaches with the States, therefore, w itnessed one or more of  the problems mentioned
above.  The Committee notes that  for these reasons, decision to withdraw coaches from District
Coaching Centres in the States wa s taken and State Coachi ng Centres still have the SAI coaches.  The
Committee also feels that the SAI wa s not able to have an  effective control/monitoring of its coaches at
DCCs.  Position which has em erged is also equally di sturbing as the DCCs have now been left to the
States who may not be able to s upport them due to financial cons traint.  The Committee, therefore,
pleads strongly for Centre’s support for employing good coaches by the States.   
Academic courses and trainings for coaches 
7.7       The NIS, Patiala alongwith regional centres  at Bangalore and Kolkata runs academic courses to
produce coaches of high caliber in different disciplines.  The Committee was informed that such courses
were available only for selected disciplines.  The Committee recomme nds to have academic courses fo r
all the sports disciplines recogni zed in Olympics and not confined  to 22 odd ones only.  This numbe r
needs to be gradually increased otherwise, need for foreign coaches would always be there in the left out
disciplines.   
7.8       The Committee, after having seen the pe rformance/standards of our coaches, has come to the
conclusion that we have to go a long way in terms of training techniques/equipments for enabling ou r
coaches to com pete with the worl d’s best.  The Committee em phasizes the need for ur gent corrective 
Page 17 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

steps for improving training techniques, curriculum improvements, updating of faculty’s knowledge, etc. 
at our academic centres. 
Working condition, etc. of coaches 
7.9       Performance of our coaches, the Committe e feels, depends upon many factors like their training,
working conditions, promotions, postings, etc.  The Committee found the coaches – academic as well as 
field, as a de-motivated cadre having meagre salary, no promot ions, no respectable living conditions,
insufficient exposure to international and modern trai ning facilities, lack of re fresher courses at regula r
intervals, etc. They appear to be the most neglected lot in the entire SAI hierarchy.   In such a situation,
expecting good performance from the coaches was certainly a far cry.  The Committee, therefore,
emphasizes the need for improving service and other conditions in which the coaches function so that
they are able to give their best to their discipline s.  They may be given assured career progression afte r
some years of experience with respectable designations. The SAI HQ. should have an efficient grievance
redressal mechanism to take care of their problems within a minimum possible time.  There is also a
need to put performance monitoring system for them at the regional centres, filling the vacancies in time
and giving them social recognition at respective levels. 
Contract Coaches 
7.10     For coaches on contract basis, a definite polic y has to be evolved to ta ke care of their problems
and concerns.   Further extension to contract coaches should be linked with their performance/output.  
VIII.                SPOTTING AND NURTURING TALENTS 
8.1       There is tremendous spor ts talent hidden in the country, particularly in rural India, but the right
and adequate opportunities have not been provided, both for sear ching as well as nurturing them. 
Having such large force of youth, we need to enlarg e the playing base in all the disciplines in the
country, by way of identifying potential sportspers ons and training them in well-equipped training 
centers across the country.  
8.2       Apart from creating sports cultur e and consciousness about sports and motivating
parents/students to take up sports, there is also a need to develop minimum playing facilities in every
locality and schools as has been done by the countries li ke China, Korea, Taiwa n, etc.  The genetically
gifted children can be identified from each local ity and schools for providing scientific training and
other support to develop their moto r qualities and sporting skills. S ports schools may also be set up
either in government or non-govern ment sector or jointly with a view to scouting young talents in 
different games and sports prevalent in a particul ar area and then nurture them by admitting them in
these sports schools.  On the basis of the performance at sports schools, students showing good potential
can be admitted and further groom ed in SAI training centres by pr oviding them good nutritious food,
scientific training techniques and equipments, etc.  
  
SAI Schemes for spotting, training, etc. 
 8.3      During its study, the Committee had occas ion to examine a number of schemes operated by the
Government and the SAI including those for spo tting, encouraging and gr ooming our young ones, as
also for achieving excellence in sports by providing training and other faciliti es to our sportspersons
belonging to various age groups. The Sports Authority  of India is presently implementing five such
schemes ranging from age groups of 8-25 years. These are: 
Scheme                                                                        Beneficiaries                             Year of  
                                                                                                                           Commencement 
National Sports Talent Contest Scheme (NSTC)  (Male & Female 8-14 years)1985-86 
Army Boys Sports Company (ABSS)          (Male 8-14 years)                         1991-92 
Special Area Games Scheme (SAG)                        (Male & Female 14-21 years)       1988-89 
SAI Training Centre Scheme (STC)                         (Male & Female 14-21 years)       1985-86 
Centre of Excellence (COX)                                    (Male & Female 17-25 years)       1998-99 
8.4       The Committee notes that these schemes were introduced with a noble aim for spotting the talent
at younger age, and nurturing them by giving every support including scientific training.  These schemes
are being implemented for a long time now.  The Committee, however, feels that these schemes have not
Page 18 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

had the desired impact.  Despite some increase in the number of tr ainees and in th e number of SAI
sports centres, orientation and implementation of these schemes need a fresh look.   
8.5       The Committee found that the schemes, pa rticularly those to scout talent at junior/sub-junio r 
level and preparing them for futu re excellence (such as NSTC, ST C, SAG etc.) suffered from the
following problems: some discipli nes having small number of traine es spread over a number of centres
in the country, hardly providing fo r full team; representa tion of girls highly inadequate; centres not
evenly spread in different States/regions and not in the areas having good poten tial; method of selection
of trainees having scope for subjecti vity; not all able to participate in selection; no adequate publicity;
lack of periodic review of  the trainees’ performance; absence of a scientific training linked with age, 
strength, stamina, etc.; lack of re quisite/modern facilities and equi pments, physical fi tness centres and
good living places at most of the centres; coaches not having requi site exposure for improving training
techniques; no adequate sports sc ience back-up at the centres; l ack of progressive and efficient
administrative policy as well  as personnel at the cent res; and last but not leas t, excessive centralization
of powers - financial and administrative, either with SAI HQ. or with the Ministry. 
8.6       As regards the ABSC scheme, the Co mmittee found that it coul d not achieve a good success
ratio towards the excellence in sports.  The Committe e feels that if each of the ABSC centres were to
confine to one specific sports di scipline, with speciali zed facilities and inputs supported by a selection
based on the specific physical and ot her standards, far more better results could be expected.  The
Committee, therefore, emphasizes the need for having an evaluation of this scheme done by a competent
agency/persons (s) with a view to deciding the future of this scheme.   
8.7       As regards the NSTC scheme, the Committ ee noticed that the trainees  were thinly spread ove r
without much of attention to the lim ited sports trainees in a particul ar discipline.  The Committee found
this scheme also to be of margin al utility in building up excellence of  high order; it is oriented more
towards general sports promotion or distinguishing oneself at a local level.  A few exceptions can hardly
be generalized.  The Committee feels that this scheme also needs a revisit for making it more effective. 
8.8       The Committee further notes that the distri bution of these schemes is not even in different parts
of the country and as such  their coverage remained, more or less , inadequate. Besides, near absence o f
an effective monitoring mechanism was conspicuous by its absence.  The Committee feels that probably
our administration machinery has not shown/taken re quired interest/efforts in implementing these
schemes with required seri ousness.  We, it appears, have cont inued with our schemes without thei r
proper assessment and evaluation.  Monitoring aspect also needs to be strengthened.  
8.9       The Committee has reached to the conclu sion that the purpose of nurturing and scouting sports
talents in the country th rough these schemes have remained elus ive as they failed to make any
significant impact as was initia lly visualized when these sche mes were framed. The Committee,
therefore, strongly reiterates it s earlier recommendati on underlining the need for proper evaluation o f
these schemes, preferably through an independent pr ofessional agency, with a view to find out the
lacunae and suggest measures for strengthening and expanding them to  more and more areas of the
country so as to bring out our talented children and youth to the forefront. 
Lack of adequate funds 
8.10     The Committee notes with concern that the funds allocated to Scheme of Talent Search and
Training (revised scheme of assis ting promising sportspersons, etc. ) is woefully inadequate.  Fo r
example, for such an important sc heme being implemented at all India level, only three crores were
allocated in the BE of 20 05-06.  Even this meagre allocation was reduced to just 50 lakhs in the RE. 
During 2006-07 also, the Committee not es, allocation for this has be en put at1.80 crores only.  The 
Committee notes that the search of  talent is actually not taken up   under this Scheme; it provides
assistance to promising sportspers ons for participation in tournament s abroad, purchase of equipments,
etc.  The Committee, thus, finds the name of the Scheme confusing.  It, however, emphasizes that the
actual spotting of talents be made  a component of this Scheme fo llowed by adequate enhancement o f
allocation for it.            
  
IX.       ROLE OF FEDERATIONS/ASSOCIATIONS
Page 19 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

9.1       Under the scheme of assistance to Nati onal Sports Federations, Gove rnment provides assistance
for training and participation in in ternational events abroad, holding of national and international events
in India, procurement of equipmen ts, training of the coaches of nati onal team under Indi an and foreign
coaches. For being eligible for assistance the sports  federations are required to meet the following
criteria.  
Follow proper, democratic and h ealthy management pract ices which provide fo r greater accountability
and transparency at all levels. 
Have proper accounting procedures at all levels and produce annual financial statements.  
Produce an annual report within six months of completion of the year. 
Have impartial and transparent selection procedures. 
Ensure that the dope test of all its players be conducted regularly as  per norms / standards laid by the
International Federation of the concerned discipline. 
Lack of coordination, monitoring, etc. 
9.2       During its deliberations on different problems plaguing the sports , the Committee found that
there was a multiplicity of agenci es involved for promoti on of sports in the country. These agencies
include the Union government, the stat e governments, the Sports Author ity of India, Sports Promotion
Boards of different Mini stries, PSUs, Military & Para-militar y forces, Indian Olympic Association, 
different Sports Federations and Associations. The Com mittee realizes that there is an apparent lack o f
effective coordination amongst these b odies/agencies. In the absence of such a mechanism, efforts and
resources do not have a focused impact.  This also  leads to wastage of time and resources with no
optimum results.  Besides, it beco mes difficult to ensure and fix res ponsibility in such a situation. As a
result, one body blames the other fo r the poor performance. The Committee also notes that even IOA is
not in a position to maintain any effective contro l and effect any coordina tion with national sports
federations/associations. The Comm ittee would like the IOA and the Ministry to emphasize upon the
federations to frame their scientif ic Long Term Development Plan as  envisaged in the National Sports
Policy 2001 and also ensure its effective implemen tation. The Committee underlin es the urgent need o f
fixing accountability for each spor ts agency. This coul d be enforced thr ough enacting a suitable
guideline or legislation in the overall interest of sports in the c ountry. It must be en sured that all sports
agencies perform their mandate in a more systematic manner with gr eater sense of accountability and
transparency. This would indeed infuse the much needed professi onalism in their working and make
their attitude  result-oriented. 
Ensuring Professionalism And Accountability 
9.3       As per the information available with the Committee the total allo cation of funds to the National 
Sports Federations numbering 55 during the last four years was as follows. 
  
2002-2003                                           -           Rs. 25.65 crores 
2003-2004                                           -           Rs. 25.68 crores 
2004-2005                                           -           Rs. 40.53 crores 
      2005-2006                                     -           Rs. 28.15 crores 
  
            On a specific query made by the Committee, the Ministry had categorically mentioned that
during the last three years no subs tantiated complaint about misutilisation of funds against any NSF had
been received by it.   The Committee would however like  to draw the attention of the Ministry to two
Unstarred  Questions Nos. 3274 and 1173 an swered  in the Rajya Sabha on 25.8.2005 and 2.3.2006
respectively,  whereby Members ha ve been informed  about there being some complaints about mis-
appropriation  of Govt. grants by N SFs.    The Committee  would like  to have full details in this
regard.    The Committee has been  given  to understand  that accou nts of NSFs getting assistance 
exceeding Rs. One crore in a year are audited thr ough CAG.    The Committee would like to have an
idea about whether against  the NSFs falling under this category, any advers e remarks were made by
CAG in the audit  reports and follow-up action taken during the last three years. 
9.4       Committee’s attention has also been drawn b y outstanding dues amounting to Rs. 1,69,15,993 /-
Page 20 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

of a large number of NSFs towards re nt etc., which have offi ces in SAI  Stadia  in New Delhi.   The
Committee observes that all the four SAI Stadia  in Delhi are running losse s with Jawahar Lal Nehru
Stadium  bearing the heaviest  ar rears of Rs. 1,35,59,180/- .   As per the latest position, these dues must 
have increased further.  The Commit tee is constrained  to note  that Ministry’s attempts so far have 
remained unsuccessful and all these NSFs conti nue to occupy SAI Stadia  without any visible
inconvenience.   Indian Olympic  Association, whic h is a very rich body leads the list of defaulters
having outstanding dues amountin g to Rs.55,59,170 which must be ev en higher as per the latest
position.   Details given to the Committee clearly indi cate that IOA has not even paid a single paise to
SAI.   The Committee fails to understand the reasons behind such an  unhealthy and undesirable state o f
affairs.   Committee’s  specific query about de recognition /appropriate ac tion against the erring 
NSFs /Associations did evoke no respons e from the Ministry.    What is more surprising is that  these
bodies continue to get Government. funds year after year.   The Comm ittee takes a serious view of this
and emphasizes that all conceivable steps need to be taken by the Ministry immediately. 
9.5       During its visits and deliberations, a numbe r of issues relating to th e functioning of different
sports federations/associations were raised before the Committee. It was alleged that certain federations
were not functioning democratical ly; their elections not being fair and regular; flouting of thei r
Memorandum of Association and other guidelines, particularly those conc erning tenure of office
bearers.  Instances were brought to the notice of the Committee, wher e some of the office bearers were
said to be holding their posts for decades together . There are federations/asso ciations being headed by
the people who have least experience or exposure to the sports. It is also alleged that these federations
spent huge amount of money on non-sporting events in cluding the elections of their office bearers. 
Some federations, it was said, were not submitting proper accounts of the funds allocated to them. They
even fail to submit Utilisati on Certificates and do not produce a nnual financial statement in time.
Besides, some of these fail to pay their dues also.   
9.6       One of the important mandates of the fede rations is to organise co mpetition on a regular basis,
particularly at district and State level to ensure maximum possible co mpetitive exposure to our athletes
and sportspersons within the count ry. The Committee, however, was in formed that local competitions
were hardly organized and hence the players se lected by some of them are found wanting on one
account or the other. The selection of teams and play ers in some cases was alle ged to have been based
on favouritism, nepotism and arbitrarines s. Federations also fail to ensu re dope tests of all its players
and as such the country has to f ace embarrassment when its players test positive dur ing international
events, as has happened in the recent past.  
9.7       The Committee feels that Federations being the most vital link in the entire chain need to assume
leadership role and wide range of  responsibilities. The national fede rations must play a major role not
only in identifying and nurturing the sportspersons , but also in providing adequate training and
competitive exposure to them.  
9.8       Nevertheless, the need for a broader vi sion, greater transparency, pr ofessionalism, as well as
accountability in their working can hardly be deni ed.  It is good that the government does and it must
respect their autonomy, but it must also ensure that they follow necessa ry guidelines regarding
preparation of Long Term Developmen t Plan (LTDP), annual calendar of  events, submitting Utilization
Certificates and accounts, etc.    The Committee has been given to understand that performance o f
Sports Federations is reviewed during LTDP/review meetings by the Ministry.   Observers have also
been appointed for various sports disciplines who are to attend sele ction proceedings and send report to
the Govt.    Thus, it is very clear that Ministry has a role to play in the functioning of Sports Federations.
It is basically for the federations and associations to see that negative perception about them was erased. 
Associating eminent sportspersons in their major activities could help improve their functioning. 
Last Minute Selection 
9.9       Poor selection criteria is another ma tter of concern for Indian Sports. The Committee was
informed about the last minute sel ection of teams. A player comes to  know about his final selection in
the team at the last moment. This creates lot of tension for such pl ayer; he is often seen running around
for getting necessary clearances, visas, etc.  The sportspersons, thus, get demotivated and are not able to
Page 21 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

concentrate on their sporting activit ies. The Committee deprecates this system of last minute selection
and urges upon the Government and the Federations to seriously devise appropriate mechanism to select
teams sufficiently in advance to en sure that the players are able to concentrate on their events.  Instead
of concentrating on their training, they have to waste their precious time and energies in getting visa and
other clearances, etc.  Timely sele ction would also help in  sending them sufficiently in advance to the
place of events for ac climatization, etc. Federations shoul d arrange necessary support system fo r
arranging the administrative clearances, timely release of foreign exchange, visas, etc.    
Prioritisation of disciplines for Olympics 
9.10     Many developing countries have identified only a few games and concen trated their efforts on
the selected games only. The Committ ee notes that we participate in majority of events more as a
customary practice, irrespective of  our chances for medals in the international events. The result is
always poor and we start blami ng our sportspersons. The fault lies in our planning. We need to
concentrate on those sports in which India has shown potential and can do better. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that our participation in international events, particularly in Olympics, should be
restricted to those discip lines in which we have competence of  international level to bag medals. It
would be better not to participat e than participating a nd losing in all the games. Our players should,
therefore, be given enough training and exposure in th e identified disciplines to  meet the international
level.  It should not mean that we  stop playing other games; we, in fact, should conti nue to play othe r
games in the country and invite fo reign teams to India to participate in competitions for providing much
needed exposure to our players.  When a discipline achieves a certain standar d, we may put that in the
Olympic category. 
X.        SPORTS MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 
10.1     Sports management and administration form s an integral part of sports promotion of any
country. Sports administrators he lp in shaping the policies and de vise suitable a nd strong delivery
mechanism for implementation of s ports policies and schemes. As pr ofessionals, they are supposed to
have the requisite vision and foresi ght to administer and effect necessary changes suited to the overall
interest of sports. They are expected to mana ge the operations of various sports schemes and
infrastructure throughout the country. In fact they n eed to evolve such a netw ork of management which
is sports-friendly and result-oriented. 
Sports Authority of India 
10.2     The Sports Authority of I ndia was basically created to look after the main tenance and utilisation
of stadia created/upgraded for th e Asian Games, 1982.  The main object ives of SAI are to promote and
broad base sports in the country; to development exce llence in sports at different levels; and to utilise
stadia in Delhi. SAI has a Genera l Body consisting of 43 Members with  Hon'ble Prime Minister as the
President, Hon'ble Union Minister for Youth Affairs and Sports as Vice-President and Secretary SAI as 
the Member Secretary. There is a Governing body consisting of 28 members with Union Sports Minister
as the Chairman, 8 eminent sports persons are represented in both th ese bodies. DG, SAI is assisted by
the Executive Directors and Regional Directors and other officials down the line. 
10.3     There are six Regional Centres located at Bhopal (Central Region), Northern Centre at
Chandigarh (being shifted to Sonepat), Western Ce ntre at Gandhinagar, East ern Centre at Kolkata,
North-Eastern Centre at Imphal and Southern Centre at Bangalore. SA I is also imparting education by 
awarding diplomas and degrees in the field of sports at NIS, Patiala and Bangalore. It also conducts the
national coaching camps for el ite sportspersons to participate in in ternational competitions. To achieve
its objectives, SAI stands and works to develop excellence for internati onal competitions in association
with National Sports Federations. 
10.4     The Committee finds that the Ministry with  its bureaucratic set up of Secretary, Joint Secretary,
Directors, etc. is busy in framing the schemes/ programmes, rules and re gulations on the basis o f
National Sports Policy 2001. There is an other tier of sports administrati on in Sports Authority of India
with Director-General, and Secret ary from All India Serv ices. There are two Ex ecutive Directors one 
dealing with Teams and th e other with Finance. Lo wer in the hierar chy are Regional Di rectors at five
Regional Centers and De puty Directors at Sub-Centers. The th ird kind of administrative set u p is the
Page 22 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

Sports Federations/Associations deal ing with different disciplines of sports. While the first two setups
are directly answerable to Government, the Federations/Associations are autonomous bodies. 
10.5     The Committee was informed that the DG, Sports Authority of India was authorized to sanction
projects upto Rs 50 lakhs and works above Rs 3 lakh are done by CPWD, which require the concurrence
of the central government through DG, SAI. The Regional Directors are entitled to approve projects
costing below Rs 3 lakh. However dur ing its visit, the Committee gath ered that a number of projects
from Regional Centers were pending fo r approval either at SAI level or at the Ministry level. Regional
Centers have hardly any financ ial power; even for petty amounts they need the approval of SAI
Headquarters. Even in administrative matters, th e problem remains same.  The system of delegated
authority appears to be missing, causing thereby inordinate delays in decision- making.  
10.6     Officers belonging to All I ndia services come to the SAI main ly as DG and Secretary for short
tenure. They being not necessarily from sports background take some time to get conversant with the
problems of sports and sportspersons .  Before they do so, they eith er go back or take up some othe r
assignments.  As a result, they are hardly in a position to make  any worthwhile and effective
contribution. Major problems, theref ore, remain unattended due to fre quent changes of key officials at
decision-making level. The Commit tee recommends that in the pres ent system of taking All India 
Service officers as DG a nd Secretary in Sports Au thority of India, there is need for inducing some
element of continuity in administrative, financial and other matters. For this, a post of Addl. DG must be
provided with distinct powers and authority in all matt ers, which should be an ex-cadre post to be fille d 
by the existing EDs.  Such a system will ensure th at Addl. DG will be s portsperson from within, not
liable to transfer. 
10.7     The Committee noted that the SAI’s Execu tive Directors were burdene d because there are only 
two posts.  As a result, they have  to look after several major disciplines. In such a scenario, the
important works remain unattended, which adversely affects the promotional aspects of sports.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends to increase the pos ts of EDs in SAI to have  a judicious distribution
of work.  
10.8     The Committee opines that present management and administrat ion is too complicated to effect
changes tuned to the requirements of  our sports. The old and traditiona l methods of administration in a
bureaucratic atmosphere has done mo re harm than good to our spor ts. It is high time to bring
professionalism in our approach and induct qualifi ed and experienced sports administrators/managers
for managing operations of our sports schemes and infrastruc ture throughout the country. Ou r
administrators have to be scientif ic, value based, progressive and recep tive to the changes. There is no
dearth of such professionals in our country. We need to decentralize our decision making process. 
10.9     The Committee endorses the view of a former  DG, SAI suggesting at least three years tenure fo r
the Secretary of Sports Ministry who could involve himself in the w hole gamut of sports administration
and feel free to take business like decisions. 
10.10   The Committee recommends that there could be a group of eminent sports persons including SAI
officials for final selection of t eams and in the monitoring of thei r performance. The Committee also
underlines the need for assigning of discipline wise responsibilities to  the sports managers in SAI fo r
ensuring a better coordination with Federations. This flexible approach  in administration would help in
overhauling the sports setup across the country. It is equally importa nt to empower the regional centers
of SAI by decentralizing the decision making process.  
10.11   The Committee observes that th e term of the General Body of SA I is for three years and the last
tenure of the General Body has expi red on 20.3.04.    Last informa tion received by the Committee was
that the reconstitution of General Body of SAI was in  process.   The Commi ttee is not happy with this
State of affairs.   Reasons for undue delay in the reconstitution of such an  important body which must
have been anticipated well in a dvance are not known  to the Committee.   The Committee would like to
be apprised about the latest position in this matter.   The Committee is also of  the opinion that a review
of existing procedure for constitu tion of General Body of SAI may be undertaken and corrective steps
initiated. 
10.12   Committee’s attention has been drawn b y a number of discre pancies pointed out by CAG in the 
Page 23 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

Audit Report and Audited Accounts of SAI for 2001- 2002 and 2002-2003.   On a specific query in this 
regard, the Committee has been in formed that corrective measures have been taken by SAI.   The
Committee hopes that with the a ppointment of statutory auditors and adherence to the prescribed
accounting procedure, such deviations would not occur in future. 
 XI.       WOMEN’S PARTICIPATION 
11.1     The Committee was informed that the S ports Authority of India has been implementing a
scheme of National Sports Festiv al for Women in which regular tournaments in 12 identified sports
disciplines are organized annuall y from Block level onwards. Th ese tournaments, exclusively fo r
women, are held to attract more a nd more women into sports activiti es at all levels. The scheme has
however not had the desired result as  there is not much enthusiastic participation, for want of adequate
publicity and incentives. The sche me, the Committee feels, deserv es wider publicity through radio,
Doordarshan and print media, in order to achieve the objectives of broad- basing the sports an d 
encouraging mass participation by women. There is a need to give good incentives in the form of cash
awards and medals so as to attract mass participation by women.  
11.2     The Committee was informed that all effo rts are made to attract greater number of women
trainees in various schemes impl emented by SAI for providing sports  training and exposure to improve
the level of their participation in the sports.  The Committee notes that during 2003-04, the percentage of 
female participation, in all the four SAI scheme s such as NSTC, SAG, STC & COX was 29.47% which
during 2004-05 slightly impr oved in comparision to last year. The women participation in All India
Rural Sports Tournament and North East S ports Festival during 2003-04 was 36.94% and 37.89% 
respectively. The Committee opines that at present women participation in th ese schemes is quite low
and needs to be enhanced to the optimum. 
            The Committee learnt that the Girls we re not getting time to use play  field particularly in certain
States.  As a result, they are not able to play/practice.  The Committee feels that such an attitude towards
our women sportsperson is deplorable.  It, therefore recommends that effo rts be made to ensure that thy
also get equal opportunity to use the existing infrastructure at all the places. 
11.3     Many parents like to send their daughters to play games but they are hesitant to do so because o f
security and safety reasons. The Co mmittee noticed that out of 18 spor ts hostels of SAI, there is only
one sports hostel for women and ther e is no exclusive SPDA hostel for girls. Therefore, the Committee
feels that, there is a need for proper planning to  develop sports amongst women, by opening more sports
hostels for them and adopting more girls’ sports schools. 
11.4     In our male dominated system, women’s part icipation in sports get neglected.  The Committee 
feels that Sports Associations/Fed erations must have a separate gr oup/unit exclusively for the women
and by the women.  Similarly, women coaches are also in state of neglect.  We must have more qualified
women coaches from amongst ex-sportswomen.   
XII.     DEVELOPMENT OF SPORTS SCIENCES 
12.1     The Committee found that th e scientific back-up to the devel opment of sports at most of the 
places was in a rudimentary stage and at others, it was virtually non-existent. Sports psychology also 
was not very much in vogue.  Sports psychology and sports sciences, in fact, were indispensable fo r
improving/testing physical as well as mental capabilities of the sportspe rsons.  In the present era of stif f
competitions, sports has turned into more of a psyc hological war. Today, the ga mes are won or lost just
by a fraction of seconds or millimeters. There is a very narrow margin between the winner and loser.
Role of psychologists and sports medical experts can, therefore,  do wonders in such a situation. A good
psychologist working with a medical e xpert can, in fact, influence, to a large extent, the outcome of the
game, as well as the performance of  sportspersons. The Committee noticed that the sports medicine was
also not being given any priority  in India. The Committee emphasize s that due attention and priority
must be given to these discipli nes by all concerned. Th e Committee recommends that the services o f
good sports physiologists, psychologists and sports medical experts be made ava ilable to our players all
the times at all the centres.  
12.2     Advance in technology has come into each and every sphere a nd sports is no exception to this.
We need to acce pt s ports as a science. S ports science s ystem in the countr y needs to be develo ped
Page 24 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

through a well-defined network from the national to the State, District and Panchayat levels where every
youth including the sportspersons coul d be benefited. To achieve this target, a National Sports Science
Institute having State, Dist rict and Panchayat level uni ts needs to be establishe d for necessary research,
education and awareness generation about sports science across the country. 
  
XIII.    SCHEME FOR ANTI-DOPING 
13.1     The scheme for dope test is being im plemented by SAI through the ‘Dope Control Centre’
located at the Nehru Stadium, New Delhi.  The Committee during its visit to the Center found that it was
still in the process of being set up and efforts were on to obtain permanent accreditation of its laboratory
by the International Olympic Committee and Worl d Anti-Doping Agency (WADA).  The Committee 
found that the pace of work at the Dope Control Centre was slow that needs to be expedited.   
13.2     The Committee shares the concern of the countrymen on the increasing instances of ou r
sportspersons, particularly the weightlifters and the athletes testing positive for the banned drugs.  These
instances raise serious questions not only about the facilities for dope testing in the country but also
about the manner in which various sports agencies/authorities are ignoring such a serious problem,
which brings shame instead of fa me to the nation.  Dope tests ar e done every time before Indian
contingent leaves the country for participating in international s ports events, and surprisingly some
sportspersons fail the dope tests outside even after having been cleared in the country.    This means that
either our test facilities and procedures are faulty or  there is a possibility of  some sportspersons taking
banned drugs after being cleared in the country.  If the drug is taken after they have been cleared, the
sportspersons should also be held responsible for testing positiv e during the international events.  Apart
from individual sportsperson, their Coaches also needs to be made accountable and they need to be more
vigilant about this.   
13.3     What surprised the Committee most was that nobody seems to take the responsibility for ou r
sportspersons testing positive for dr ugs.  The Ministry and the SAI argue  that it was basically not their 
duty/responsibility to get the athletes dope tested because they are under the control of IOA and various
sports federations.  Federations have ready excuse about the high cost of these tests and the lack of latest
sophisticated facilities for this purpose in the country.  T hus, at the end of the day, nobody was ready to
own the responsibility for the bad name that such in cidents bring to the nation.  The Committee at the
same time wishes to appreciate the efforts of the IOA in getting some of our sp ortspersons cleared after
they tested positive.   
13.4     The Committee feels extrem ely unhappy about the continuing indifference shown by all sports
bodies – Ministry, SAI, IOA, Federa tions to such a serious malaise.  Involving many ag encies in this, 
the Committee feels, has only complicated the matter.  They appear to be passing the buck to each other
with no serious efforts being made by any of them to clean the mess that plagued our sports.   
13.5     The Committee recommends to augment the testing facilities and a dopting foolproof procedure
for dope testing.  We should evolve  a mechanism with least possibility  of tempering with the samples. 
The entire procedure should be strictly as per the norms laid by WADA  and the punishment has to be as
per the World Anti-Doping Code. The Ministry should make efforts fo r employing experts in the area 
for making the test results authentic.   
13.6     The Committee also emphasizes an urgent need for educating our at hletes, coaches and othe r
supporting personnel about the harmful effects of doping on their health as well as to the prestige of the
nation.                      
  
XIV.    ROLE OF MEDIA 
14.1     The Committ ee feels that media – both electronic and print, can pl ay a major role in creating
consciousness about sports in the country. It is a potent and powerful instrument for popularising sports.
Good amount of money is being generated by telecasting sports activities at the national and
international levels.  There is an urgent need for putting a policy/stra tegy  for this purpose, which we do
not have so far.  Government is called upon to initiate action in this regard without further delay.    
14.2     The Committee feels that there is a need to increase the e quipments and other facilities available
Page 25 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

with Doordarshan and AIR so that  they do not feel handicapped in covering major sports events. With
so many private TV channels around, it is necessary to inject more professionalism in the quality of live
coverage and commentaries  on Doordarshan. There is also a need  for calling eminent sportspersons in
programmes on fitness, yoga , sports and games.  T.V. channels may also play an effective role in
projecting the techniqu es and style of eminent sportspersons by showing them in slow motion on the
national hook-up. 
XV.      PUTTING SPORTS IN CONCURRENT LIST 
15.1     The Committee was gi ven to understand that ‘sports’ being a State subject the primary 
responsibility of developing sports in the country re sted with the State Governments and the respective
State Sports Councils. The Committe e notes that at present there is a plethora of agencies working in
different directions towards pr omotion of sports. These agencies are working without any
coordination/liaison amongs t themselves. Such approach towards sports has not yielded any tangible
results so far.   Instead it has resulted in utter confusion and wastage of scarce resources.  
15.2     The Committee appreciates the limitations  of Central Government  in fixing accountability
amongst multiple agencies in the backdrop of present constitutional arrangements regarding division o f
subjects under different lists. There is hardly any law or regulation de fining the roles of such agencies
and as such there is a lot of dupli cation of efforts. Sports being in  state list, the Central Government
lacks legislative powers required for strict enforcement of Government guidelines.   
15.3     Besides, the Committee during its delibera tions with some State governments found that sports
hardly was a priority for them mainly due to the se vere resource crunch with them.  In some of the
States (like Gujarat and Karnataka), resources spared for sports were not increasing or were going down
over the years.  In such a situation, Centre’s role and contribution has to increase manifold in promoting
sports at national level.  
15.4     The Committee also notes that while ‘Sports ’ figure in the ‘State Li st’ of the Constitution, 
‘Education’ figured in the ‘Concur rent List’. Both the activities viz Education and Sports are inter-
related; in fact they are two f acets of the same coin. The Commi ttee while underlining the need fo r
bringing sports under the ‘Concurrent  List’ wishes to emphasise that it should be done only with the
consent of the States.  While Sports in the country could be developed in an effective and coordinated
manner only with Center and States as equal partners.  
15.5     The Committee was informed that legislati on for including ‘Sports’ in the Concurrent List was 
introduced in the Rajya Sabha in 1988, which could not  be discussed in the Pa rliament. The Committee
was informed that in 1996 a meeting of representatives of all politi cal parties to discuss the subject
remained inconclusive. Again in 2005, the matter wa s placed before the conf erence of State Sports
Ministers.  Many of the participating representa tives of the State Governments reported that thei r
Governments had not firmed up their views on the subject. Written communi cation regarding views o f
some State Governments have been received while communication from some State Governments is still
awaited. The Committee recommends that the views of the State Gove rnments may be once again taken
before taking a decision in this regard. 
15.6     In view of the greater responsibility of  the Union for encouraging sports, the Committee
recommends that Union has to play a pro-active role with regard to bringing sports under the Concurrent
list.  States’ fears in this regard will have to be  removed to convince them ab out the utilit y of such a 
move by citing the example of education.  It wa s only after education was brought to the Concurrent
List, popular schemes like SSA and MDM could be sponsored by the Unio n at all India level.  All the
States are being benefite d immensely by these scheme s.  A legislation may al so be enacted to provide
for an effective coordinating mechanism in the spor ts arena without impairi ng the autonomy of various
agencies. Such legislations have greatly improved the spor ts scenario in countri es like USA, Germany,
Thailand, Sri Lanka and China. 
XVI.    COMMONWEALTH GAMES 2010 
16.1     It is a matter of national pride that our country is going to hos t the Commonwealth Games in
New Delhi from 3 rd to 14 th October 2010. Holding the games successf ully is not only related to the 
prestige of the country, it would also benefit the country in more ways than one.  It would generate lot of
Page 26 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

services and activities relating to tourism and econo my, the most important be ing creation of the most
modern infrastructure and facilities fo r various sports disciplines in the country.  Besi des, it also creates
general awareness as well as required ambience and attraction for sports, partic ularly amongst ou r
youth.   Holding of such mega event bestows not only enormous responsibility but also involves huge
finances and other resources.    
16.2     The Committee noted that less than fifteen hundred days are left for the Commonwealth Games,
2010 and felt concerned because most of the important projec ts reportedly were yet to take off.  The
Government informed that for planning, preparat ions and smooth conduct of  Games, institutional
arrangements include a Core Group of Ministers, an Apex Committee in  the Ministry of Youth Affairs
& Sports, a Committee of Secretaries from the concerned.  The Ministries/Departments and Government
of Delhi to monitor the implementation of the deci sions of the Group of Mini sters and other related
matters.  There is an Organizi ng Committee headed by the Presiden t, Indian Olympic Association fo r
the conduct of the Games.  The Lt. Governor, Delhi ha s the overall responsibility of local security, law
& order and matters pertaining to  DDA.  A Sub-Committee headed  by Chief Minister of Delhi is
responsible for matters falling within the jurisdiction of the State Government in terms of upgradation of
civic infrastructure, etc.  This Sub-Committee will have representatives from Transport, Health, Finance, 
DDA, PWD, NDMC, MCD, Police, et c.  An Empowered Security Committee headed by Union Home
Secretary would oversee overall the security arrangements.   
16.3     The Committee notes that  large number of bodies/committees have been entrusted with the
responsibility of preparation and conduct of the Commonwealth Games, 2010.  The Committee
apprehends that multiplicity of authority for or ganizing the Games could ma ke proper coordination and
supervision very difficult.  Lack of mutual c oordination, among various aut horities might delay the
projects.  The Committee is conc erned about timely execution and completion of various projects fo r
Games.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that all these agencies should work as a team dedicated
to ensure early and smooth comple tion of all the works in a time- bound manner. It is equally important 
to identify the bottlenecks in the execution of these proj ects and ensure fast track clearances from
different bodies.  Monitoring and supervision also need to be foolproof and effective. 
16.4     As regards the projected expenditure for the Games and sources ther eof, the Committee was
informed that the estimated expe nditure on Government account w ould be about Rs. 3502 crores and
these will be met thorough the sources indicated as under:- 
1.         Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
  
            -           Conduct of the Games              -           Rs. 767 crores 
            -           Venues                                                 -           Rs. 1340 crores 
            -           Preparation of teams                             -           Rs. 300 crores 
  
2.         Ministry of Urban Development 
Venue infrastructure & Games  -           Rs. 325 crores 
Village (DDA) 
3.         Delhi Government to approach Planning  
Commission for 
Civic infrastructure including      -           Rs. 770 crores 
venues allocated to them 
16.5     To a question relating to nature of privat e participation in preparation for the Games, the
Committee was informed that the DDA had proposed to develop accommodation in Games Village on a
public-private partnership basis.  In addition, the Organising Committee has indicated that it would raise
revenue through sponsorship, broadc asting, merchandizing, li censing, etc. and ef forts would also be
made to securing maximum possibl e private sector participation by way of contributions/sponsorship
especially in the form of value in kind.  In addi tion to the existing partne rship between the Olympic
Association and the Confederation of India Industr ies, Government has begun interacting with various
Chambers of Commerce and Industr y. As regards the private participation, the Committee, as a note o f
Page 27 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

caution would like to point out about the profit motive behind i nvestment by them particularly in
developing residential units.  While forging partnership with them in  this regard, this aspect needs to be
kept in mind especially in view of  the fact that these residential facilities might be required for such
international sporting events like Asian Games, etc. for which India is reported to have been aspiring.     
16.6     Regarding the status of preparations, the Committee was informed, that the process of creation of
various sports venues, the Games Village and civic infrastructure had begun.  According to the schedule
prepared by various stakehol ders, the sports venues have been pr oposed to be completed by December,
2009, the Games Village by August, 2010 and the Civic infrastructure is  expected to be completed in
phases by September, 2010.  The Comm ittee notes that the completion dates of the projects have been
kept very close to the Games.  Based on our experi ence of civil construction s generally being delayed,
the Committee would like the agencies executing vari ous projects to work wi th utmost dedication and
commitment to complete the job even before the final schedule.  We should take a cue from Delhi Metro
in this regard.     
16.7     To a query about the utilizat ion of sports infrastructure and the residential areas after the Games,
the Ministry stated that the sports infrastructure would be utilised fo r regular sports activities, including
national & international events and for imparting training to  Indian sportspersons.  The residential zone
in the Games Village is proposed to be developed by DDA on a Public-Private-Participation (PPP) basis 
for which no funding will be given by Government.  The accommodation is propo sed to be built partly
as hotels and partly as residential/ service apartments.  As regard, the utilisation of sports infrastructure
after the Games, the Committee feel s that it will have to be ensure d well before the Games are over. 
Our experience after the Asian Games in 1982 had s hown that the infrastructure created then had
remained unutilized/underutilised for a very long time.  For avoiding  this, the Committee would like to
emphasize the need for having a prospective plan fo r this purpose ready to be implemented after the
Games.  
            The Committee expresses its concer n about the manner in which the residential units would be
untilised that are proposed to be constructed through private participation.  The Committee would like to
emphasise that a mutually agreed mechanism be de vised to keep these unde r government control even
after the Games are over. 
16.8     The Committee wishes to emphasise that the entire amount projec ted for the Games should not
be spent as capital expenditure onl y; some proportion of it must be  allocated for sportspersons and
coaches also in the form of incentiv es and other assistance to them.  This is more necessary in the face
of the fact that if their moral is down, their performance will be affected adversely.   
16.9     Training for sportspersons is another important component for such international events. Since
most of our stadia and other ve nues in the meantime would either  be under upgradation/construction,
this might pose a problem regardi ng regular training of our sportspe rsons.  Our new infrastructure fo r
Commonwealth Games would be ready towards the end of 2009 or beginning of 2010. And till that time
our sportspersons would have no option but to depend upon the existing old infrastructure and facilities. 
Expecting medal-winning performan ces from our sportspersons traine d on such infrastructure as 
compared to those from Canada, UK , Australia, etc. would, in fact, be a wishful idea.  The Committee,
therefore, emphasizes that the up-gradation as well as creation of in frastructure need to be completed at 
least a year ahead of the Games so that our spor tspersons could get the be nefit of such improved
infrastructure till we get the Commonwealth Games infrastructure. 
 
Page 28 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

PART – II 
PROBLEMS RELATING TO REGIONAL  AND OTHER CENTRES OF SPORTS
AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
XVII.     DR. SHYAMA PRASAD MOOKHERJEE SWIMMING POOL COMPLEX 
 17.1    The Committee visited on the 27 th January, 2005 what is popularly known as Talkatora 
swimming pool New Delhi that was constructed duri ng 1982 Asian Games.   It is the only swimming
pool in Delhi that functions during winters also. Th e swimming facilities are available for participants
from schools, paramilitary forces as well as for institutional bookings. Synchronised swimming has also
been recently started in the comple x, as it is also one of the even ts in the Commonwealth Games, 2010.
It has an auditorium with a cap acity of 100 persons; it is rented out to various corporate houses to
generate revenue. Follow ing issues/problems were noticed duri ng the visit of the Committee to the
swimming pool: -  
  
-           The air-conditioning plant installed at the pool was not effective as it was old. 
-           Recycling of water was done to meet the shortage of water; heating facility was not working.  
-           Lack of proper coordination amongs t various agencies like CP WD and NDMC hampered the 
upkeep of the pool and its complex. 
-           An Engineering Cell of SAI to m onitor the construction/maintenance works at the complex, 
needs to be put in place.  
-           Stagnant water leads to breeding of the mosquitoes in and around the pool. The pool design
needed to be modified. 
-           During winter one of the pools is closed, which affects adversely the swimming practice. 
-           Shortage of swimming coaches was the biggest problem.  
-           There is no provision of a lift in the building.  
-           There were no proper lights in the female change room.  
-           The present dormitory accommodati on available was not only in sufficient but also very
congested. A separate hostel as well  as a separate swimming pool needs to be constructed to meet the
requirement of the forthcoming Commonwealth Games.  
-           Efforts should be made to tap swimming potential from the coastal belts of the country. Initiative
to train the swimmers to compete in all the 96 events be made  by the National Swimming Federation, as
SAI has nothing to do with this. It only provided the requisite infrastructure.  
-           The Committee was informed that  a proposal for Swimming Ac ademy for identifying the
swimming talents from various fa r-flung areas was pending with th e Ministry of Youth Affairs an
d
Sports. The Committee recommends that the propos al be expedited in vi ew of the forthcoming
Commonwealth Games. 
17.2     The Committee would like to have point-wis e response from the Minist ry of Youth Affairs and 
Sports on the points made above. 
XVIII.        JAWAHARLAL NEHRU STADIUM, NEW DELHI 
18.1     The Committee during its visit to  the Jawaharlal Ne hru Stadium on the 27 th January 2005, too k 
an over-view of the sports infrastructure in the stad ium. It visited the newl y developed Dope Centre,
Medical Care Centre, Human Performance Lab, existing Dope Control Lab and the Residential wing.  
18.2     The Committee took special interest in th e infrastructural faciliti es available there and
particularly in the newly developed Dope Centre. The Committee w ould, however, like the Government
to improve the level of maintenance and over all cleanliness in laboratories at the Dope center so that not
only the testing or experiments give  better results but the technicians also get more hygienic working
conditions. The Committee feels that the Dope Centre at Jawaharlal Nehru stadium being the only one in
the country should have more sports scientists a nd experts in the laborator ies. This would help in
improving the research standards of the Dope Ce ntres. There is also need to provide more
physiotherapists/doctors in human performance lab as well as in the medical center. 
18.3     Tenure of the Managing Committee of Nati onal Sports Development Fund (NSDF) has expired
and new members ha ve not been a ppointed so far.    The dela y in constitution of  the Committee is
Page 29 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

adversely affecting the decision ma king process for utilisation as well  as resource generation of this
corpus.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the status of constitution of the same.             
XIX.                SAI, WESTERN REGIONAL CENTRE, GANDHINAGAR 
19.1     During the course of its visits to Weste rn Regional Centre, SAI at  Ahmedabad, the Committee
found the existing synthetic hockey surf ace and synthetic athletic track in a pathetic state, which had
out-lived its normal life.   The Committee also noticed that the Ol ympic size swimming pool was full o f 
dirt, grass, insects etc. There seemed to be no regular maintenance.  The Committee was informed on the
spot that Pump House was not working because its ope rator was on leave.  But in reply to a written
query, the Committee was informed that the pool was closed for maintenance at that time.          
19.2     When asked if any proposal to replace the athletic track was received by the SAI, Head Quarter,
the Committee was informed that the proposal wa s received from Regional Director, Western Region,
Gandhinagar on 1.11.2001. Moreover, efforts to ma ke budget provision in  year 2002—03, 2003-04 an d 
2004-05 did not materialize.   The same was approved on 15.9.05. The Co mmittee was assured that in 6
months, it would be completed. Regarding the replacement of hoc key turf and the condition o f
swimming pool, it was informed that on acceptance of technical bid, the financial bid will be opened and
the successful tenderer will be awarded the work of laying the surface.   
19.3     The Committee deprecates the practice of  lingering important propos als for unduly longer time
mainly at the Headquarter.  Proposal for replacement of  synthetic athletic track received in the last yea r
of the 9th Plan remained on paper till 2005-06 (fourth year of the 10 th Plan) for want for funds.   Fate o f 
25 year old swimming pool also seems to be equally pathetic.   The kind of feedback received leaves no
doubt. 
19.4     The Committee recommends that immediate remedial steps be taken to renovate, upgrade and
make the swimming pool functional.  It would also li ke to be apprised about the status of laying the
athletics synthetic track in the Center.  
19.5     The Committee was informed  that SIU had assessed the strengt h of staff at the center as 136
instead of the original sanctioned strength of 260.  Ex isting strength at the time of the Committee’s visit 
was 175.  It means this center had surplus staff.  But the Committee feels that the assessment by the SIU
was not at all based on objective/expert advice.  
              
19.6     The Committee was also given to understand that there was a demand for Lab Technician, Data
Entry Operator and Hindi Translator at the Center.  The Committee is, however, surprised to note that no
progress seems to have been made .   Reason being the ban on direct  recruitment and the post of Lab
Technician falling under this  category.   Posting of Data Entry Op erator was being de layed as it was to
be considered under the over all assess ment.   The Committee is not ha ppy with the lack of initiative on
the part of SAI.   Ban on recrui tment of technical post is no longer there.   The Committee therefore,
emphasizes that filling up of these posts may be pursued without any further delay.    
19.7     The Committee is also c onstrained to note that no regular Me dical Officer is deployed at SAI
Western Region for quite a few year s.   The Committee has been informed that in 1991-92, the post o f 
Medical Officer was merged with th e cadre of Junior Scientific Of ficer and thus no post of Medical
Officer is in existence in SAI as per the Recruitment Rules of SAI.   The Committee is not convinced by
the assurance regarding action being initiated to post a Medical Officer at Gandhinagar.  The Committee
feels that posting of Medical Officers needs to be made mandatory at all centres for proper care of ou r
sportspersons.     
19.8     During discussion with State Sports offi cials, a number of demands  were made by Sports
Authority of Gujarat: - 
  
-           Discontinued regular diploma courses in Western Regional Center  
                        should be re-started. 
-           More coaches are required to cater to the sports needs of the state. 
Even former sportspersons were ready to give their services under Voluntary Coaching Scheme. 
-           Powers should be dele
gated to Re gional Directors. The y should be dele gated more powers to 
Page 30 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

settle long pending administrative problems swiftly. 
-           There is an urgent need to setup a physiotherapy unit at the Western Center.       
-           Establishment of additional SAI centres/sub-centres in Gujarat. 
-           Additional infrastructure required in Gujarat for adventure sports like water sports, aero sports
and artificial wall climbing. 
-           Astroturf and synthetic track was required in 4 major cities of Gujarat. 
-           More Central funds required for State level sports complex. 
-           Providing SAG centers in Tribal area like Deogarh Baria in Archery. 
-           Demand for skating ring, which has great potential in Gujarat. 
  
19.9     The Committee would like to have the Ministry’s response on all these points mentioned above. 
  
XX.      SAI, SOUTHERN REGIONAL CENTRE, BANGALORE 
20.1     The Committee found this Center to be one of the best maintain ed Centers with bette
r
facilities/infrastructure of all SAI regional centers in the countr y. During the course of deliberations, the
Committee raised its serious concern over the purch ase and laying of a sub-standard and defective 
Astroturf used for hockey. The repr esentative of Ministry present du ring the meeting accepted the lapse
and informed that vendor had agreed to change the defective turf without charging additional amount.   
20.2     Subsequently, on being questioned as to how  this lapse for laying a sub-standard turf at the 
Center took place, the Committee was informed that a senior officer had been appointed by DG, SAI for
enquiry and that enquiry was yet to be finalized.  In the meantim e, the Company had been asked to
replace the defective surface with th e latest turf at their cost and for this purpose a Committee had been
constituted to determine the best quality offered by the firm.  The ma tter would be put up to Finance
Committee of SAI.           
20.3     The Committee does not appr ove of such kind of negligence on the part of the agencies and
stresses that stringent acti on be taken against those responsible fo r monitoring the project.  Such lapses
hamper quality as well as timely comp letion of project and thus  harm the interest of  the sportspersons.  
This lapse also points out towards lack of foolproof procedure and mechanism for entire exercise. There
should be a penalty clause concerning quality in th e contract awarded to a ny company.  The Committee
would like to know the status of findings of inquiry within one month of presentation of its report. 
20.4     Ministry/SAI were asked to furnish the status report of pe nding works in the Southern Region
item wise including date of proposal received a nd reasons for delay.   The Committee is, however,
disappointed to note that instead of  giving the requisite information, Mi nistry have simply forwarded a
list of 40 proposed infrastructure  projects in the Southern Region amounting to approximately Rs. 21.00
crores.   Majority of these projects are under examin ation.   The Committee apprehends that there would
be no change in the status of thes e projects, specially due to transf er of all infrastructure schemes to
states from 2005-06 onwards. 
20.5     When asked about the quality of athletics tr ack at the Southern Regiona l Centre at Banglore, the
Committee was informed that it w ould be fit for another two years.   The Committee notes that this
decision was taken in 2003-04 and two y ears are already over.  It, therefore, expects that the process o f
relaying the track must have been +already completed.  
20.6     The following issues were raised by the Sportspersons, Coaches, Arj una Awardees, and State
Sports Associations:- 
-           Allocation for sports in Karnataka was decreasing which would continue to go down for another
two years.  Center should come forward to help the st ate in this regard as funds are the main ingredients
catalyzing the promotion of sports. 
-           SAI coaches and physical education Teachers should be under Admini strative control of State
Sports Department. Some more SAI coaches should also be deployed in Karnataka. 
-           Need for providing a Grievances Cell specifically for the Sportspersons. 
-           Lack of Sports infrastructure, equipments etc in the State; 
-           Cycling Vellodrome for Karnataka is needed;
Page 31 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

-           More STCs to be opened to nurture Sports talent in the State; 
-           No swimming pool of International standard is available in Bangalore. 
  
            The Committee would like to have Ministry’s response to the points mentioned above.   
20.7     The Committee was informed that the pr oposed sub center in Tami l Nadu is pending for many
years, due mainly to non-transfer of suitable land by the State Government.  The Committee in one of its 
earlier report has asked the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports to expedite th is project by taking it up
at the higher levels but no progress seems to have been made in this regard.  The Committee reiterates
its recommendation and asks the Ministry to sort out the matter urgently with the State Government by
demanding an alternative site. 
XXI.    SAI REGIONAL CENTRE, BHOPAL 
21.1     During the its visit to the construction site  of the upcoming SAI Regiona l Centre in Bhopal, the
Committee was informed that out of the total estima ted cost of Rs. 9.5 crores, Rs. 3 crores had already
been sanctioned and the remaining money was yet to be sanctioned. The Committee also visited the
newly constructed hostels, stadia and other building at the centre.     
21.2     The Committee noted that this centre was started in the year 2001, ov er a hundred acres of land.
Sixty acres were earmarked for construction of the Golf Course whereas the Golf Course needed another
40 acres to which the State Government had agreed  in principle.  The Committee recommends to
complete the formalities to get that land at the earliest. 
21.3     The Committee was told that  there were two synthetic turfs with  flood light facilities in the plan
for constructing the hockey stadium.   The construction of the synthe tic turf was much  delayed due to
inaction on the part of the Minist ry of Youth Affairs & Sports from March 2002 to May 2003.   The
tendering process of the synthetic turf became chaotic and finally th e tender was to be floated by July
2005. Thus, the project was delayed.   The officials informed the Comm ittee that this did not lead to
budget escalation in the construction of the hockey s ynthetic turf because of the depreciation in the
values of the US dollar. 
Similarly, the construction of Multi- purpose hall was also found to be languishing for over three years.  
Due to one reason or the other the construction work could not be started and as a result, the constructo r
stopped the work on the ground of price escalation.  Th e reasons given by the Ministry of Youth Affairs
and Sports for the delay were stoppage of work by the contractor delay in finali zation of architect, etc. 
All these reasons, the Committee feels were easily a voidable.  This shows a clear slackness of the
responsible authorities involved in executing th e project.  This become s a classic example o f
bureaucratic functioning.  The Committee was promised that this multipurpose hall would be completed
by May 2006.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the status of the project.  
21.5     On being enquired from the Ministry as to why the work of the SAI complex was stopped fo r
more than one year, the representatives of the Mi nistry assured the Committee that records would be
checked and a detailed note on the stoppage of work would be sent for information.  The Committee did
not receive such note from the Ministry till this report was finalised. 
21.6     In 1990, the proposal of the Government of  M.P. for synthetic tr acks was approved and some
amount was sanctioned but thereafter money was withhe ld and the projects were yet to be completed.  
The representative of Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports info rmed the Committee that the State
Government was yet to submit the utilisation certificate and on receipt of the same they would look into
the matter. 
21.7     The Committee notes that three cases  of Madhya Pradesh government were pending fo r
completion since 1990 for want of progress reports /UCs etc from the conc erned authorities. The
Committee also notes that all the Sports Infrastruct ure Schemes have been tr ansferred to state secto r
w.e.f. 1.04.2005 and hence no funds have been allocated to the Mini stry during 2005 -06 for such 
schemes. However, the Planning Commission has agreed for providi ng funds for the already approved
projects during RE 2005-06 and BE 2006-07. 
21.8     The Committee is the vi ew that the pace of work relati ng to Bhopal center being quite slow
needs to be ex pedited. The Committee would like to im press upon the Ministr y to vi gorously pursue
Page 32 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

with the implementing agencies to expedite the submi ssion of UCs so that releas e of further grants are
released on time to them . The State Government of Madhya Prades h be requested to cooperate in the
matter for timely completion of the infrastructur e projects which are long pe nding. It is all the more
important keeping in view the fact that no further amount will be provided for the infrastructure schemes
from 11th Plan onwards. The Committee would like the Ministry to acquaint the Chief Secretaries of the
concerned States of the fact so that they can act accordingly. 
21.9     A number of points emer ged during the discussions with sportspersons, athletes, Arjuna
Awardees, Sports Administrators and other eminent sports personalities: - 
  
-           The communication between the Regi onal Office and the Central Of fice of the SAI was taking
too much time.   That was causing delay in routine sports activities. 
-           Indian camps preparing for the inte rnational sports events we re filled up by the nominees o f
politicians without looking into the merit and ability of the individuals. 
-           Sports Administra tion might be given to the Sports pe ople instead of the bureaucrats and the
politicians, as was the practice now. 
-           Sports Associations and Federations be headed only by meritorious sports persons. 
-           The ban imposed on recruitment of coaches was badly affecting th e development of sports.  
Steps might be taken to re move the ban so that availability of  coaches was ensured for development o f
talents. 
-           A New Sports Policy with job guarantee for sportspersons may be formulated at the earliest. 
-           The officials of the Madhya Pradesh State Governme nt demanded that `            Sports'            
should be brought under the Concurrent List.  
21.10   The Committee hopes that the above issues ra ised during the discussion would be considered
sympathetically in the overall interest of the sports in the country.  It would like to have a status report in
brief, for its perusal within a month of the presentation of this Report. 
 XXII.      SAI SUB-CENTRE, KANDIVALLI 
22.1     The Committee inspected various sports facili ties at the SAI Centre at  Kandivalli in Mumbai.  It
also interacted with the trainees , sportsperson, and coaches there. Th e Committee noted that originally
135 acres (approx.) of land was allotted by the State to the Centre.  At pr esent only 37 acres of land was
with the Centre, the rema ining land had been encroached by th e land mafia and converted into real
estates. 
22.2     The Committee visited the boys' hostel, whic h was housed in a dilapida ted old period building.  
The boys were living in su b-human conditions.  The c ondition of the staff quarters was very bad.  The
Committee also saw kabaddi field, multi-purpose fiel d, the mess, medical center, Judo Karate Hall and
other office buildings. During its interaction with the students at Judo Karate Hall, the Committee
gathered that trainees were getting only Rs. 75 per day for diet, which was fixed way back in 1989.  The
Committee also took notice of  the lack of adequate st aff in this SAI Centre.  All the buildings in the
Centre were quite old and poorly ma intained.   Less said is better  about the conditi on of athletics
track/Hockey field.   It did not show any sign that it was being used by sportspersons. 
22.3     The Committee after seeing that Centre is constrained to say that this centre is in the state of utter
neglect There is no infrast ructure worth in name, not to say about  modern facilities .    Why are we
running this Centre, was the question that naturally came to the Committees mind.  
The Committee was informed that SA I was finding it difficult to mainta in the buildings etc. because as
per the MoU between the SAI and the State Government , the land had not been leased to SAI so far. 
During the Committee’s visit, State Government officials were there who emphasized the need to revert
the land back to the State, show ing serious difference of opinion between the SAI and the Government
of Maharashtra in this regard.   The Committee, therefore, calls upon th e Ministry to take it up with the
State Government to sort out this  problem as soon as possible. The Centre has the potential to be
developed as a most sought after place by being locate d in prime area of Mumbai.  It can generate some
revenue also.  The State may be convinced by presenting a plan-of-action for upgrading/modernizing the 
infrastructure for making it a modern and useful Centre.
Page 33 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

22.5     A number of points were raised in the meeting with sportspersons, coaches, Arjuna awardees and
sports administrators in Mumbai. 
-           Kabadi to be made an event in the 2010 Olympic Games. 
-           The ground available in the premises  of Mumbai University wa s not being allowed by the 
authorities to be used by sportspersons. 
-           Fund generation for development of spor ts should be the main focus.  ‘Sports cess’ like the 
‘education cess’ may be levied for the development of spor ts infrastructure.  The industries and the
corporate sector may be involved in development of sports infr astructure by giving certain tax
concessions to them. 
-           The SAI Centre, Kandivalli might be asked to coach the children of surrounding areas. 
-           Concessional tickets may be provided to sportspersons in train as well as air journeys. 
-           Steps may be taken to remove the encroachments in the SAI Centre at Kandivalli. 
-           DD Sports might be asked to reduce the charges for telecasting sporting events.  At present DD-I 
was not giving any time slots to sports.  If the sports events were telecast on DD-I the Corporate Houses 
would participate and fund the sports events. 
-           No national Hockey Championship had been  held in the last five year s.  All the Federations be 
asked to hold at least one National Championship to continue their recognition. 
-           Mumbai needs one more hockey stadium. 
22.6     Regarding the use of big ground available in the premises of Mumbai University the Committee
was informed that the matter was brought to the not ice of the Secretary, Educ ation and Sports of the
State Government of Maharashtra so that they could take up the matter with the University authorities as
the administrative control of the ground rests with them.  
22.7     The Committee would like to have Ministry’s response to the points made above. 
  
XXIII.             WATER SPORTS COMPLEX, MURIKKUMPUGHA 
23.1     The Committee visited the water sports complex at Murikkumpugha in Trivandrum District.  
This water sports complex worked under the control of the Kerala Sports Council.   Rowing, Kayaking
and Canoeing were the three items practiced in the water sports complex.   There were fifteen girls
residing in the hostel of the complex and practicing the water sports. 
23.2     The facilities at the complex were found to be bare minimum and lot of improvement and
developmental activities were re quired to make the co mplex a premier water sports complex. The
Chairman of the Sports Council Ke rala requested the Committee that there was a need for more number
of boats for the complex.  The Committee would like the Ministry’s response for improving facilities at 
this center. 
  
XXIV.             SAI TRAINING CENTRE, LAL BAHADUR SHASTRI STADIUM COMPLEX,
KOLLAM 
  
24.1     This is a joint venture of SAI, and the State Government that was started in the year 1991.  There
were around 60 boys and 68 girls st aying in the complex in the dormitory accommodation.   The
accommodations for the athletes were provided around the stadium.  There were 185 non-residential 
trainees.  Gymnastic, Athletics, Boxing, Hockey, Kabaddi and Volley Ball were the main activities at
the centre.   The Committee was happy to note that over the years the centre had produced 19
international champions. The Committee feels that SAI should promote more a nd more such centres as
joint ventures with State Government in the country for promoting sports.  
  
XXV.               THE OPERATION GOLD SCHEME OF THE KE RALA SPORTS COUNCIL,
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 
 25.1    The Committee took the opportunity to witness a march - past by the children of 78 schools who 
participated in the ‘Operation Gold’ at the Central Stadium in Thiruvananthapuram. The Committee was
informed b y the Kerala S ports Council that O peration Gold was jointly or ganized b y them and
Page 34 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

Thiruvananthapuram District Pancha yat for popularizing sports and game s as well as spotting talent in
the rural schools.  ‘Operation Gold Scheme’ wa s introduced in 78 Schools during 2003-2004.   Fifteen 
students in the 5 th standard were selected in  each school by the coaches of Kerala Sports Council 
according to age and certain norms se t forth for the scheme.   The Phys ical Education Teachers of these
schools were given initial training fo r a period of 10 days by the expert coaches of  the Council in the
basics of Athletics, Gymnastics,  Kho-Kho and Kabaddi. The selected  students were given uniforms, 
shoes and socks by Kerala State Sports Council.  The teachers were also given uniform (Track suit and a
T-Shirt).   Sports equipments  and Teacher’s honorarium were gi ven by Sports Council, and light 
refreshment @ Rs. 7/- per student was provided by District Panchayat.  
25.2     It was estimated that Trivanadrum district  having 78 centres might have  to incur an expenditure
of Rs. 3.5 crores for seven years.   This scheme, whic h brings almost all children  to the field of sports,
could be extended to all Districts so  that children studying in the 5 th Standard in Kerala can be brought 
to active sports.   The Kerala S ports Council requested that two - th ird funds for the scheme should be 
shared by the Central Government on this project so that they could give the children nutritious food for
better performance.  This scheme, it appears to the Comm ittee, could be a noble one in not only
locating/identifying talents in an organized way at young age but also for tr aining and preparing them
for later years to excel in nationa l & international events.  Committ ee’s specific suggestion about its  
extension at national level was not found agreeable to the Ministry.  The Committee is not convinced by
the contention of the Ministry that there already exist a numbe r of centrally sponsored sports
Promotional Schemes.  The Committee strongly feel s that the scheme of `O perational Gold’ jointly 
implemented by the Kerala Sports Council and Thir uvanthapuram District  Panchayat can be a role
model for other states.   The Mini stry can without any sp ecial effort make othe r States acquainted with
the merits of `Operation Gold’.   
25.3     The Chairman, Kerala Sports Council (KSC) submitted that there were half finished projects o f
KSC due to scarcity of funds.   Th e SAI might come forward to help co mplete the half-finished projects 
such as, the swimming pool complex at Pirappan K ode and High Altitude Training Centre at Munnar. It
was also submitted that the High Al titude Training Centre at Munnar could be used  as a training centre
for training athletes from all over I ndia because of the suitability of the climate there.   Once it was
developed India could save lot of foreign exchange, which currently was being spent for sending athletes
to foreign countries for training. 
25.4     The Committee was impressed by the performance of Kerala in Sports and feels that all possible
encouragements and assistance must be rendered to the State performing well in sports.   It also observes
that the High Altitude  Training Centre at Munnar could be an ideal centre for middle and long distance
runners because of its climate .   It could be development as an inte rnational centre.  If it was developed
as a proper centre we can avoid sending our athletes to foreign countries for training.  
25.5     The Director Sports, Government of India informed the Committee that 16 projects were pending
completion with Kerala Government .  If the existing projects were completed the Government of India
will be ready to fund other projects.  Committee also endorsed the Director’s view. The Committee is of 
the opinion that these projects should be completed wi thout further loss of time in the larger interest o f
the athletes and sports.  
25.6     The Secretary, Department of Sports, G overnment of Kerala made  a submission that the
preparation of the completion certif icate for various projects financed by the Central Government was a
big problem.   The Central G overnment was not accepting the certificates countersigned by the
engineers attached to the Local  Bodies, as they were not r ecognized for signing the completion
certificates. At present, the crit erion was that a Deputy Secretary le vel officer has to countersign the
completion certificate for acceptan ce of the Central Government.   He made a request that Central
Government might relax the norms  and allow the engineers attached with the Local Bodies to
countersign the Completion Certifi cates.  The Committee is awar e of the recurring problem o f
utilization/completion certificate.  The Committee recommends that th is problem could be sorted by
proper coordination amongst the various agencies. 
25.7     The Committee was informed that at Kochi an international level swimming pool was very much
Page 35 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

required. Central Government might  provide fund for the purpose.   The Committee directed the
Secretary, Department of Sports, Government of Kerala to give a project proposal for Water Sports
Complex and Swimming Pool at Kochi. 
25.8     The Committee learnt that  out of the total sports budget of the country, Kerala was getting only
one crore for development of spor ts.  The Committee observed that Kerala was a goldmine as far as
sports talent was concer ned and it was for the Government a nd Sports Authorities to develop and
nurture the talents considering th e sterling performance of  the sportspersons from Kerala in various
National and International sports events.  The Committee recommends to suitably enhance the amount.  
XXVI.  LAKSHMIBAI NATIONAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION                      
  (LNCPE), THIRUVANANTHAPURAM  
  
26.1     The Committee noted that LNCPE, which is an exclusive institution for physical education, was
a fully residential college.   240 students was the total intake of the college.    The students were selected
after 10+2 level through written exam, physical test a nd interview.   Six to eight percent students were
from outside Kerala and the others  were from Kerala.   The Commit tee was happy to learn that there
were no failures of students in the college and none of the students who passed out of the college was
unemployed. 
26.2     The Committee visited Multipurpose Hall Gymnasium; Me dical Centre, Library, Swimming
Pool, (which was under construction) and other facilities at LNCPE. There was no nurse working in the
Medical Center.  The DG, SAI assured that a nurse would be appointed immediately on an ad hoc basis.  
The Committee would like to press for posting a nurse there on permanent basis urgently. 
26.3     The Committee was informed that all faci lities at LNCPE were av ailable to Kerala Sports
Council on request. In addition to th e students of LNCPE, the local st udents were also given training on
Gymnastics. The Committee appreciate d the pay and play sc heme available to the people for using the
facilities at LNCPE.  It feels that it should be done  with great caution to ensu re that it does not become
inaccessible to players and students. 
-           Regarding under utilisation of funds by the LNCPE, the Committee was informed that it was due
to delay in the project approval for the swimmi ng pool. The Committee was a ssured that the swimming
pool would be completed by June 2005. The Committee notes that many of the projects envisaged in the
LNCPE master plan are yet to be implemented.  This may be done immediately.  It hopes that
swimming pool would have started by now. 
-           The Committee was informed by th e SAI that centralized purch asing for LNCPE was done to
maintain very stringent quality specifications for which global tenders were invited. 
-           The DG SAI submitted before the Co mmittee that the State Govern ment should chart out a plan
to utilize all the facilities available in LNCPE, Trivandrum. The Committee desires that steps be taken to 
propagate the schemes of LNCPE so  that the aspiring sportspersons  and students could utilize the
various facilities. 
-           The Committee suggested that LNCP E might start training coache s also.  The DG, SAI replie d
that NIC, Patiala was already suppl ying sufficient number of coaches.  There was no study made for the
requirement of additional coaches.  If there was any necessity of Coaches, SAI was willing to start a
course for training coaches in LNCPE. The Comm ittee recommends that LN CPE must be  assigned a
larger role and developed as another academic wing of  SAI to cater to all the South Indian States.  It
could be developed on the same pattern as that of NIC Patiala. 
-           At present advanced training facilities for athletes were not availabl e in Kerala.  The prominent
sportspersons who were given adva nced training in other parts of India were finding it difficult to
continue their practice when they co me back to Kerala.  That adversely affected the capabilities of the
sportspersons. A centre might be started to give advance training to selected athletes. 
-           The Committee feels that regarding the construction of synthetic track rate contract may be
invited instead of the present system of contract. 
-           In Kerala there were specific geogr aphic areas wherefrom a large number of sportspersons in
particular sport were comin g from.  Those areas ma y be identified and trainin g Centres ma y be started
Page 36 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

according to the requirement of that particular area. 
-           In Kerala there were no synthetic tracks.  At least three synt hetics tracks were required fo r 
Kerala. 
-           Indigenous games of the country were  ignored.  The Sports Councils and the State Governments
may come out with proposals for encouraging these S ports.  Ball Badminton was one such event, which
had been ignored.  The Badminton Federation could introduce Ball Ba dminton as an item in national
events. 
-           Individuals who were devoted to the cause of developing sports are opening their own academies 
at their own expenses for training the sportspersons.  Paul Vault Academy at Pala and Volley Ball
Academy at Karikattoor were some  of the examples. The Committee recommends that the SAI should
step in to see that the individual academies, which were functioning and contributing to the development
of sports, should get adequate financial assistance to sustain their programmes. Technical assistance and
coaches be provided in individual academies. The Committee stressed that the proposed women athletic
academy must be started at the earliest at LNCPE. Th is academy would give a fillip to women
participation in sports. 
XXVII.            SAI EASTERN REGIONAL CENTER, SALT LAKE CITY, KOLKATA 
27.1     The Committee visited th is SAI Centre, which has an area of 42 acre s with certain modern
facilities and infrastructure for different sports.  The Center has, apart from  playing areas for various
sports and games, Medical Center, Indoor Training Hall, sc ientific laboratories including sports science
and sports medicine center, lodging and boarding facilities, etc.  There is an academic department which
conducts Diploma, Certificate, Refres her, Orientation courses.  The faci lities for different disciplines in
the Center are being used by the local sportspersons, apart from the trainees residing in its campus.  This
Center earns some revenues by way of daily coaching scheme, pay a nd play scheme, hiring of sports
infrastructure and equipments and display of hoardings on its boundaries.  This Eastern Center presently
monitors sporting activiti es in six States and one  Union territory i.e. Bi har, Jharkhand, Orissa, West
Bengal, Sikkim, Tripura and Andaman & Nicobar Islands.  It looks afte r total 43 units of  SAI’s scheme 
that includes seven STCs, nine SAGs, eight NS TCs, one Center of Excellence, etc. under its
jurisdiction.  This Center is manned by around 200 employees belonging to different categories.   
27.2     The Committee visited this center and we nt around various play fields, hostels, multi-purpose 
halls, sports sciences and sports medicine centers, fitness centre, administrative blocks, etc.  While doing
so, members of the Committee met tr ainees as well as some of the el ite sportspersons practicing in the
playground and tried to get feedback and ascertained their views about  the improvement of facilities,
etc. at the Center.  During its vis it to the sports medicine and fitn ess center which was working in a
makeshift arrangement, the Comm ittee found that its floor was sinking making thereby the entire
structure quite dangerous.  The equipments, etc, in the center also  were found to be either very old o r
obsolete in certain cases.  In view  of the importance and large juri sdiction of this SAI Center, the
Committee emphasizes the urgent need for not only providing a sa fer accommodation for the sports
medicine and fitness center but al so for providing more sophisticat ed equipments for improving the
performance of our sportspersons and knowledge of the coaches.   
27.3     The Committee was informed  that the existing area of the cent er had become inadequate for its
further expansion and that more land was needed  for setting up one more  indoor Center and othe r
modern facilities for the sports.  The Committee was informed that some land was available adjoining to
the center that could be utilized for this purpose.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry and SAI should prepare a plan for expansion and take up this matter with the State Government
of West Bengal urgently to get some additional land for this purpose so  that Center could be
expanded/modernized. 
27.4     The Committee found that a synthetic track for athletics was al so needed for the center urgently
as demanded by some eminent sportspersons practicing at the ground.  The gymnastics training area also
needs to be improved/increased which the Committee found to be of smaller in size.   
27.5     There is one Sub-Centre coming up at Hazaribagh, Jharkhand, which was told to be unde r
construction.  The Comm ittee learnt that the progress of this Sub-Center, foundation of which was laid 
Page 37 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

on 2nd January, 2003, has been quite slow.  In view of high sporting potential in Jharkhand and currently
there being no adequate number of SAI units functioning in that ar ea, the Committee recommends that
the all-out efforts are required to be  made to make this Sub-Center f unctional with no further delay.  It 
should be provided with latest training and coaching facilities in different games and sports. 
27.6     Then, the Committee held discussions with ev ery section of the Center including representatives
from various sports bodies/associat ions and former sportspersons in the conference room.  The
Committee received useful suggestions and feedback about the f unctioning of the center as well as the
suggestions to promote sports in general.    
27.7     During the interactions, im portant issues including administrativ e and financial, relating to the
Center’s functioning were raised and discussed.  One of the main  issues related to the transfer an d
posting of the coaches on selectiv e basis, without following any es tablished guidelines/norms and
transparency.  It was alleged that  while favoured-ones were  rewarded, others were punished by posting 
them at difficult places.  Some were not disturbed even after se veral years at one place.  It was also
alleged that payments of certain employees and coaches was stopped without any legal basis.  The
Centre was alleged to have declared out-of- bounds for some of the coaches.  The Committee, in view of
most of these questions being admini strative in nature, had directed the DG, SAI, who was also present
in the meeting, to look into these allegations and initiate efforts not only for redressing these grievances
but also for taking appropriate action against those found guilty. 
27.8     The Committee must say that after visi ting the Center it found the general ambience and
atmosphere in the SAI Eastern Cent er not very conducive to the prom otion of sports; sportsman spirit
being conspicuous by its absence.  This  certainly indicated that all was not well with the working of the
center and that needed immediate attention of the SAI headquarters.  The Committee would like to have
a note on the actions taken for its perusal within a month of presentation of this Report.       
XXVIII.          NORTH-EAST REGIONAL CENTRE, IMPHAL 
28.1     The Committee visited this centre which is locat ed in an area of 64 acres of land at an altitude of
790 mts. to provide infrastructure and equipments fo r the sportspersons of th e North-East as also fo r 
holding coaching camps in di fferent sports disciplines including organizing conferences/seminars, etc.
on various aspects of sports.  The Committee went around to see the in frastructure and other facilities
available at the Centre which incl uded sports science and fitness cent re, archery field, athletic track,
basket ball and football grounds, hoc key field, multi-pur pose indoor hall, rowing cannel, volleyball 
court, etc.   
28.2     The Committee found that this sprawling cent re located in a conducive  climatic region gave a
highly neglected and deserted look.  Except for mul ti-purpose indoor hall, archery field, rowing cannel 
and sepak- takraw (grass), all other fields and infrastructure were in a very bad shape.  The athletic track
was water-logged and the members of  the Committee could hardly beli eve when told that it was an
athletic track.  The fitness centre was housed in a temporary accommoda tion.  The feeling of it being an
important sports centre was very much missing.  There may be given various reasons – relating to law 
and order, topographical, etc., for the existing state of  affairs at this Centre, but the Committee was left
with an impression that this centre was perhaps being run for the sake of running it.  This certainly could
have been developed and maintained like any other centre located in Bangalore and Kolkata.  But this
centre, to the Committee’s mind, bore a stamp of utter neglect .  This centre, if properly maintained, can 
do wonders in disciplines like Judo karate, taekw ondo, weight lifting, wushu, athletic, wrestling and
boxing for which enough potential is available in th e NE region.  While making this observation, the
Committee does not overlook the c ontribution made by this Centre in producing sportspersons like
Dingku Singh, Suresh Singh, Sanamacha Chanu, Brojeshor i, Kunjarani Devi, Surajlata, Marcy Kom,
Anita Chanu, Tingongleima Chanu w ho have brought laurels for the country in the international
competition, many of them being Arjuna Awardees.       
28.3     The Committee, therefore, feels that the NE  Regional Centre needs to be supported in a big way
for which special package would be needed for upg rading/improving the exis ting infrastructure and
facilities to a particular standard without further delay.  The Committee would like to point out that this
is the onl y Re gional Centre, that is practically workin g as a Sub-Centre bein g headed b y a De puty 
Page 38 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

Director instead of a Regional Director.  The Committee is yet to find a convincing reason for it. 
28.4     The Committee thereafter vi sited the National Games Complex situated in Imphal which has
excellent and well-maintained infrastructure such as a huge stadium having a hockey field with Astroturf
enclosed by synthetic athletic trac k, facilities for riffle shooting, swimming pool, latest  facilities fo r
boxing, judo, karate, etc. water bodies  for water sports and many ot hers.  The Director, Sports,
Government of Manipur who took the Committee around informed that  these facilities were highly
under-utilized mainly because Imphal was not bei ng preferred as place for holding tournaments and 
championships by various Sports Federations/Associations.  The Co mmittee found the th ings in this
complex totally different to what it had seen in the SAI, North-East complex.  The Committee also feels 
that this infrastructure needs to be protected and supported by making efforts for holding more and more
competitions at this place.  The SA I and the State government will have  to sit together to chalk out a
strategy for this purpose in a give-and -take spirit.  Let us not allow the existing infrastructure to remain 
unused and thus, go waste.       
XXIX.             SAI SUB-CENTRE, GUWAHATI 
29.1     The Committee visi ted the Sub-center on the 7 th of November, 2005 and went around to see 
various facilities and infrastru cture.  It is located in the heart of Gu wahati city in an area of 7.5 acres. 
The Committee found that except for th e tennis, facilities for others sports and games at the Sub-Center 
were not at all upto the mark.  Th e Committee was informed that the Sub-Center has produced in recent 
areas international boxers like Kalpana Choudhury, Pr onamika Boro and Prativa Kachari.  The Sub-
Center has also produced football ers representing the country at j unior level.  The Committee is
constrained to observe that the boxing arena as well as the football field of the Sub-Center was not in 
proper form/condition.  The Committee feels that they needed  upgradation urgently so that ou r
sportspersons preparing for international competitions are not put to any disadvantage.   
29.2     During the discussion that the Committee had after the visit, a demand for a swimming pool,
cycle vellodrome and shooting range was raised.  Requirement of two more SAG centers in Assam was
also made.  The Advisor to Chief Minister, S ports & Youth Welfare, Government of Assam who
received the Committee at  the Sub-Center, put a demand to upgr ade the Sub-Center, as a Regional 
Center.  He argued that the Guwahati being the gateway to North-East was very well-connected with the 
NE States as well as rest of the country.   He al so assured that the Govern ment of Assam was ready to
provide necessary help in this regard.  So much so, he offered the infrastructure built at Sonapur for the
33rd National Games for this purpose.   
29.3     The Committee is of the opinion that the demand of upgrading this Sub- Center deserves serious 
consideration particularly, in view of the State Government’s ready of fer for necessary help as well as 
offering infrastructure existing at Sonapur that was created for holding 33 rd National Games.  Secondly, 
in view of the poor and neglected condition of the North-Eastern Re gional Center at Imphal, and it 
practically working as a Sub-Centre looking after only Manipur, Mizoram and Nagaland, the demand for
upgrading Guwahati Sub-Centre become more important.   
29.4     Another fact noticed by the Committee was th at the Guwahati Sub-Cent re was not attached to 
any Regional-Centre, it is the only Sub-Center in the country directly monitored by the SAI 
headquarters, Delhi.  The Committee also noted that Tripura and Si kkim were being looked after by the
Eastern Centre at Kolkata,  whereas it feels, these States should have been ei ther with Guwahati or with
Manipur.  These States ca n be attached to Guwahati, if it is  made a Regional Centre for a bette r
monitoring and implementation of the SAI schemes.  This will also ease the burden on Eastern SAI
Centre, which has States like Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa and West Bengal having huge population as well
as vast areas.  The Committee re commends that this proposal/schem e needs to be considered by the
Ministry and the SAI in consultation with the Governments of Assam an d Manipur.  Manipur has
already excellent infrastructure in their Nationa l Games Complex which rema ins highly under-utilized 
throughout the year; some arrangements, therefore, may be made with the State governments for the
upkeep and the utilization of the existing infrastructure jointly.        
XXX    CONCLUSION 
Page 39 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

  
            The observation and suggestions/rec ommendations of the Committe e on the sports scenario in
the country are on the basis of its on-the-spot visits to our infrastructure, etc. written documents received 
from the official/non-of ficial sources, evidence of official s, sports administrators, coaches,
sportspersons, representatives of sports Associations and Federati ons.  State Governments were also
consulted in this process.   Based on the i nputs received by the Commit tee during study-visits an d 
discussions, the Committee reaches to the conclusion that although we may not have been able to do as
is expected in the sports, India has vast potential to improve its performances tremendously.  There have
been disappointments but shiny patc hes of achievements cannot be overlooked.  We have sportspersons
capable of giving outstanding perfor mances; we have huge sporting tale nt scattered in different areas;
we have the coaches and sports administrators of world class and last but not least, we have been able to
create some modern infr astructure also. We, as democratic country, are capable of bringing about
revolutionary changes required for promotion of sports and to a le vel second to none. Our increasing
youth population in coming years is going to be our greatest stre ngth. They have done India proud in
other areas, there is no doubt that  they cannot do same in sports as  well.  We are a fast growing
economy. We have had the privilege of hos ting Asian Games twice in 1952 & 1982. The world
community has acknowledged our po tential and capabilities and given us the opportunity to hold
Commonwealth Games in 2010.  We  are also looking forward to hosting Asian Games and even
Olympics.   
We will have to take certain nece ssary measures for making India a fr ont-runner in international sports.  
Setting our goals high is as importa nt as preparing ourselves to achi eve them.  We will have to do much
more not only in case of creating m odern infrastructure and facilities but also in winning medals akin to
our size and population.  There are a number of critical defi ciencies and weaknesses that need to be
addressed urgently and seriously.  
One of the most critical areas that needs immediate attention is that of allocating adequate resources fo
r
the sports.  The amounts so far gi ven for this purpose by both Centre  and States have been highly
inadequate in view of the vast area and huge population of the countr y.  Sports has to be given the
priority it deserves.  We have failed miserably in a ttracting private participati on in sports development
for bridging the gap between demand and supply in this regard. 
Distinct lack of any effective c oordination/cooperation betw een the myriad of agencies including the
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, SAI, States Governments, va rious Sports Associations/Federations,
etc. The Committee was informed that the functioning of  Sports Federations/A ssociations, leave much
to be desired.  Currently, we have a situation where none of the agencies is prepared to take
responsibility and thus, being accountable for the existing state of affairs. 
Ministry takes lot of time in cl earing/approving proposals received from different sports complexes that
need to be streamlined.  There has to be a closer coordination among Ministry, SAI and the Regional
Centers for expediting the plans. In SAI also, some kind of decentrali zation, administration and
financial, is needed so that Re gional Centres are able to work e fficiently.  There is no judicious
distribution of responsibilities among key officials of SAI.  One Ex ecutive Director looks after different
aspects of nearly 30 to 35 competiti ve sports disciplines.  Similarly, at regional SAI centres also, the
Regional Directors have to fulfill innumerable responsibilities leaving little time for them to monitor the
training as well as performance of the sportspe rsons, maintenance and upkeep of infrastructure at
various centres on regular basis. 
Besides, we have not been able to keep pace with  the changing training techni ques at the international
level.  Many of our athletes, for example, who ha ve potential, aptitude a nd stamina, do not perform
mainly because they do not get tr aining based on modern technique s.  Our coaches also do not get
adequate exposure to the latest training techniques and hence the need for foreign coaches continues. 
The strengthening of sports science back up is needed in a big way for performance enhancement of our
sportspersons.  At least one sports scientist would be need ed for each Sports Federation.  The expenses
in this regard can be shared between the concerned State Government and the Federation.   
The Committee does not doubt an ybody’s intention but sim ply good intentions are not enou gh, unless
Page 40 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm

they are translated into goal-orient ed development planning and its time- bound implementation.  The 
long-term development plan ning needs to be undertaken.  This a pproach needs to be  broadened furthe r 
for which Committee has emphatically said that unless education and s ports and games were integrated
and made part of the evaluation system, the requi red motivation and ambience for it would be missing. 
Sports administration and management  also needs to be drastically re formed by imparting institutional
as well as attitudinal changes.   Community participation in th ese efforts would go a long way in
achieving our objectives in this re gard.  Social recognition and econom ic security to our sportspersons
would certainly attract the youth for taking sports as a career. 
            The Committee expects that the s uggestions/recommendations of th e Committee in this regard
would be considered seriously and implemented both in letter and spirit
Page 41 of 41185th Report of Human Resourse Development
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/185threport.htm