126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
HUNDRED – TWENTY SIXTH REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
2002-2003 (DEMAND NO. 44) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY WELFARE
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON   10TH     APRIL, 2003)
LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 10TH    APRIL, 2003)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2003/VAISAKHA, 1925 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                 
PREFACE                                                                                                         
REPORT                                                                                                           
CHAPTER I    Recommendations/Observations which have been  accepted by the Government
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
                        Government’s replies
  CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not
been        
                         accepted by the Committee
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still
awaited
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                                              
ANNEXURE                                                                               
MINUTES                                                                                          

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2003)
 
1. Shri Arjun Singh           ¾¾                Chairman
 
MEMBERS
            RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Dr. Abrar Ahmed        
3. Dr. Akhilesh Das
4. Shri B.P. Apte 
5. Shri Bachani Lekhraj
6. Shri Eduardo Faleiro 
7. Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik
8. Shri Lalhmingliana
9. Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey
10. Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav Ravi
11. Shri R. Sarath Kumar
12. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
13. Shri Mrinal Sen
14. Smt. Vanga Geetha
15. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
 
LOK SABHA
 
16. Shri Ambareesha
17. Shri Ramakant Angle
18. Shri Kirti Jha Azad
19. Shri G. S. Basavaraj
20. Shri Ram Rati Bind
21. Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria
22. Prof. Kailasho Devi
23. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
24. Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit
25. Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
26. Shri R.L. Jalappa
27. Shri Baliram Kashyap
28. Shri Brij Lal Khabri
29. Shri Samik Lahiri
30. Shri Y.G. Mahajan
31. Shri  G.Mallikarjunappa
32. Dr. Manda Jagannath
33. Smt. Nivedita Mane
34. Shrimati Jas Kaur Meena
35. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* ceased to be member w.e.f 29th  January, 2003.
 
(i)
36. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
37. Smt. Kumudini Patnaik
38. Smt. Renu Kumari

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
39. Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao
40. Shri Sunil Dutt
41. Shri Ramsheth Thakur
42. Dr. N. Venkataswamy
43. Smt. Ganti Vijaykumari
44. Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
45. Vacant
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
PREFACE
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this
Hundred  Twenty Sixth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in the Hundred-
seventeenth  Report of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (Demand No.44) of the Department of Family
Welfare,  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2002-2003.
2.         The Hundred-seventeenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development was presented to  the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30
th April, 2002. 
Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of Family
Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 8 th
January, 2003. 
 
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
 7
th April, 2003.
 
 
NEW DELHI
April 
7 , 2003
Chaitra 17,  1925 (Saka)     
 ARJUN SINGH
 Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development.
          REPORT
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in its One Hundred Seventeenth Report on the  Demands for Grants (Demand No.44) of the Department of Family
Welfare,  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2002-2003, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 30th April, 2002.
2.         Action Taken Notes which had been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained
in the Report, have been categorized as follows:-
(i)
                  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:      1.5, 1.7,  3.6,  (Chapter
I) Total-3
(ii)                Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies: 3.5, 3.10,3.11, 3.13, 4.4, 5.3, 5.5, 5.10, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 7.1, 9.3, 10.4, (Chapter II)  Total-

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
14
(iii)               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee: 1.6, 2.4, 3.4, 3.12, 3.15, 3.16, 5.4, 5.8, 5.9, 8.3,  11.2. (Chapter-III)  Total- 11
(iv)              Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited
(Chapter IV)    NIL
 
The final  replies in respect of  the recommendations/observations made in Chapter IV of the Report are
still awaited from the Department.  The Committee may be apprised of the same as and when action is
taken.
 CHAPTER I
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
INTRODUCTION
Recommendation/Observation
 1.5      The Committee notes with satisfaction that the percentage of coverage in 2000-2001 in respect of TT for
pregnant women and BCG, Measles, DPT and Polio for infants has increased in comparison to the preceding year.
Action Taken
Every effort will be made to maintain and improve the performance in the coming years also.
Recommendation/Observation
1.7       The Committee understands that under the Community Needs Assessment Approach (CNAA) an action plan is
prepared each year at the district level based on the need assessment done by Auxiliary Nurse-Midwife of Sub-Centre at
village level. In the beginning of the financial year, the health worker will first complete the house-to-house survey.
Based on this survey, Eligible Couple Register is updated by the ANM. The Committee has been informed that the State
Governments are impressed from time to time to ensure that the Sub-Centre action plan is got prepared for each Sub-
Centre in the State. The Committee has its own doubts about the implementation of this annual exercise, which is most
essential for successful implementation of Family Welfare Programme, specially in the remote and inaccessible areas. 
The Committee strongly feels that surprise inspections in the performing as well as non-performing districts by Central
teams/dedicated NGOs/ Social Workers can bring out the ground reality. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Department should initiate such an exercise in 2002-2003.
 Action Taken
The Department of Family Welfare has started sending senior officials from the Department from 2001-02 to
visit Districts and to see themselves the functioning of various schemes of family welfare at the district, Community
Health Centre, Primary Health Centre and Sub-Centre level. The checklist for undertaking detailed inspection includes
as to whether the preparation of action plan under CNAA flows from the ANMs at the Sub-Centres or not. The visits in
the year 2001-02 have been organised in the  Empowered Action Group (EAG) States namely, Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal.
Further Comments
On a specific query as to how many visits were undertaken in the year 2001-2002 the Committee has been
informed that 31 visits were made to the various districts of 8 EAG States by Senior officers of the Department. The
names of EAG States alongwith the names of districts visited are as follows:
 

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
Sl. No. Name of EAG States Name of Districts visited No. of Districts
1. Bihar Gaya, Muzaffarpur, Patna 3
2. Chhattisgarh Korba 1
3. Jharkhand Ranchi, Deoghar, East Singhbhoom, Hazaribagh 4
4. Madhya Pradesh Hoshangabad, Ujjain, Jabalpur, Indore 4
5. Orissa Cuttack, Kalahandi, Sambhalpur 3
6. Rajasthan Ajmer, Udaipur, Tonk, Jodhpur, Bharatpur 5
7. Uttranchal Dehradun, Nainital 2
8. Uttar Pradesh Azamgarh, Lucknow, Meerut, Varanasi, Faizabad,
Agra, Chitrakoot, Kanpur Dehat, Gorakhpur
9
  TOTAL: 31
RURAL FAMILY WELFARE SERVICES
Recommendation/Observation
3.6       The Committee notes that 22842 Primary Health Centres exist in the country against the requirement of 25907
Primary Health Centres. However, there are only 5435 Rural Family Welfare Centres at present. Hence, there is a need
to open many more Rural Family Welfare Centres by the States. Given the tight financial position of the State
Governments, the Committee feels that it is a great challenge for them.
Action Taken
This point is to be deliberated by the States in their discussions with the Planning Commission. On our part we
are conveying the observation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development to the
Planning Commission.
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT'S REPLY
 
RURAL FAMILY WELFARE SERVICES
Recommendation/Observation
3.5       The Committee is sympathetic to grievance of some of the State Governments who will be placed
disadvantageously as a result of the proposal.  The Committee recommends that the Department should vigorously
pursue its proposal with the Planning Commission for compensating the affected States. The Department should make
concerted efforts to fix a rational basis for distribution of liabilities amongst the State Governments so that no injustice
is done to any State.
Action Taken
The position has been explained in response to Para No. 3.4.
Recommendation/Observation
3.10     The Committee is constrained to note that the major defaulting States in respect of setting up of Sub-
Centres(SCs) are Bihar, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Meghalaya, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, West
Bengal and Delhi. In respect of Primary Health Centres (PHCs) these are Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat,
Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Delhi. As far
as Community  Health Centres (CHCs) are concerned, Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Delhi are the
major defaulters.
Action Taken
The establishment of Sub-Centres, PHCs and CHCs is monitored under 20 Point Programme by the Ministry of

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
Statistics and Programme Implementation which is the nodal Ministry for monitoring the 20- Point Programme.   It is
also monitored under Basic Minimum Services (BMS) Programme by the Planning Commission.
The targets for establishment of SCs, PHCs and CHCs are finalised by the Planning Commission in consultation
with  the respective State Governments.
 The targets for the 9 th Plan were kept at the level of “Existing gaps between the number in position and the
number required to cover 1991 population as per the existing norms for population coverage”. 
            As per the guidelines issued by the Planning Commission under Rural Primary Health Care, available funds are
to be utilised on priority basis for purchase of equipment, consumables, drugs required for improving quality of
services. Funds may be provided for construction purposes only when absolutely necessary.
REASONS GIVEN BY SOME STATES FOR UNDERACHIEVEMENTS 
            Some of the defaulting States like Rajasthan expressed the desire for cancellation of targets of CHCs due to non-
availability of funds.
            Government of Maharashtra proposed to establish health centres as per Master Plan prepared by Government of
Maharashtra considering Taluka as a unit.
            Government of Tamil Nadu decided to freeze the number of CHCs at existing level and instead proposed to
introduce 24 hour  PHCs at Block level by upgrading the existing block level PHCs to run 24 hours.
            Government of West Bengal, as a policy matter, has decided to improve the standard of existing infrastructure
by upgradation/ strengthening of health units rather than addition of more health centres.
Government of Orissa sent `nil’ progress for achievements of Ninth Five Year Plan targets.  They have been
requested to include the  Ninth Five Year Plan targets in the Tenth Plan targets.
Government of Uttar Pradesh also requested to reduce the target of CHCs.
Further Comments
On a further query the Department has informed about the  reasons given by the States of Orissa and Uttar
Pradesh   for not achieving the target of opening health centres.  The Government of Orissa had earlier requested this
Ministry to include the Ninth Five Year Plan targets in the Tenth Five Year Plan targets. Government of Uttar Pradesh 
had also requested to reduce the target of CHCs of Ninth Plan. However, Government of Orissa & Uttar Pradesh  were
requested to supply detailed reasons for under achievement of the targets during Ninth Plan. No reply has yet been
received from both the States.   They are regularly reminded to make available various issues/reasons for under
achievement of targets. Underachievement in targets for Ninth  Plan in Orissa and Uttar Pradesh  are as under:-
 ORISSA UTTAR PRADESH
 Target Achievement Target Achievement
Sub-Centres 447 0 2184 0
CHCs 108 0 621 48
Monitoring is done under 20 Point Programme by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
Recommendation/Observation
3.11     The Committee is perturbed to note that targets for setting up of Sub-Centres, PHCs and CHCs during Ninth
Plan seem to have been prescribed for namesake only. The achievement level for the first four years of Ninth Plan 1997-
2001 clearly indicates this assessment.
 Target Achievement level                                             (upto 2000-
01)
Sub-Centres      7686 1053
PHCs 1521 693
CHCs 2903 410
Action Taken
The position has been explained in response to para 3.10.

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
Recommendation/Observation
3.13     The Committee also observes that in many States, the number of established Sub-Centres exceeds the projected
requirements as per 2002 projected population. Financial liability with regard to all existing 1,37,311 Sub-Centres is to
be borne by the Central Government from 2002-2003. The justification of bearing the expenditure in respect of excess
Sub-Centres set up in different States by the Centre needs to be explored from all aspects, especially in view of the fact
that proposal of the Department for financing the establishment of new Sub-Centres under the 100% Centrally-
Sponsored Scheme is pending with the Ministry of Finance and shortage of Sub-Centres is there in large number of
States.
Action Taken
Sub-Centres are normally established by the State Governments as per population norms. However, the ground
realities in some areas make it imperative for the State Governments to establish more Sub-Centres than fixed as per
these norms. This may be due to difficult terrain, absence of roads, hilly regions, coastal areas or deserts etc. In these
areas, travel time and travel distance for a patient in a remote village to reach a health facility also becomes crucial in
addition to the population norms.
One Sub-Centre normally serves 4-6 villages. Ideally, Delivery Huts/Health Posts or some sort of health facility
for providing Reproductive & Child Health Services should be available in every village. Other facilities like Rural
Family Welfare Centres, ISM&H Dispensary and Primary Health Centres should also be there nearby. In the absence of
these facilities, Sub-Centres try to fill up their gap. However, due to financial constraints, establishment of all these
facilities may not be possible for several more decades. In the meantime, if surplus Sub-Centres have been established
by some States to provide services to the people and meet some of their unmet needs, Central Governments should not
hesitate to support the States in the maintenance of these surplus Sub-Centres which have already been created.
URBAN FAMILY WELFARE SERVICES
Recommendation/Observation
4.4       The Committee is of the view that for improving outreach service delivery system in urban slums, reorganization
of Urban Family Welfare Centres should be made at the earliest. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the
Department should make adequate provision for reorganization of Urban Family Welfare Centres in 2002-2003.
Action Taken
The issue of reorganization was considered in the proposal for Tenth Five Year Plan. However, the Department
took a view to undertake the proposal of reorganization of Urban Family Welfare Centres with Urban  Reproductive and
Child Health (RCH) Programme. Therefore, no provision has been made for reorganization of Urban Family Welfare
Centres under Special Schemes during 2002-2003.
REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH POGRAMME (RCH)
Recommendation/Observation
5.3       The Committee notes with appreciation the rationalization done by the Department in restructuring the RCH
Programme and feels that the Department should, in the same vein carry similar rationalization/restructuring, wherever
possible, in respect of other programmes.
Action Taken
This rationalization/restructuring is being attempted in other programmes also with new initiatives.
Recommendation/Observation
5.5       In respect of SCOVA Societies, which are vested with the powers of implementation of RCH programmes in the
State, the Committee in its 101
st Report on Demands for Grants 2001-2002 of the Department of Family Welfare
recommended that the Department should examine whether these societies could be headed by the Secretary,  
Department of Family Welfare in the States. The Department in its Action Taken Note has stated that this matter would
be taken up with the appropriate authorities. The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction that the Department has not so
far taken up the matter with the State Governments even after almost a year has passed. It desires that this may be done
at the earliest and the outcome may be intimated to it.

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
Action Taken
The aforesaid recommendation was reviewed in the Department. Except for Bihar, the existing arrangement was
not causing difficulty. Accordingly, in case of Bihar, the State Governments was advised in July 2001 to constitute
SCOVA under the Chairmanship of Secretary (FW).
Further Comments
The Department has informed that the Bihar Government was advised in July 2001 to constitute SCOVA under
the chairmanship of Secretary in-charge of Family Welfare.   This is in process as per information received from the
State Government.
Recommendation/Observation
5.10     A scheme for holding RCH Camps at PHCs in remote and under served areas has been initiated during 2000-
2001. The Scheme is being implemented in 102 districts in 17 States. While appreciating the Scheme, the Committee
find that only 6 States have intimated that camps are being held in identified districts. The Committee recommends that
the Department should pursue with the remaining States also. Efforts should also be made to extend this scheme to more
districts.
Action Taken
The scheme for holding RCH Camp at PHCs in remote and under-served areas was initiated during 2000-2001
for implementation in 102 districts of 17 States. Camps are being held regularly in identified districts of 12 States. The
scheme is being continuously monitored and discussed with the States. The scheme was reviewed in a meeting held on
22-23 May 2002 with State Family Welfare Secretaries. It has been assured by the Secretaries that they will initiate
methods to see that the camps are held regularly and are also monitored and supervised. Other States have been advised
to start implementation of the scheme in the identified districts. Taking into consideration the benefit of the scheme in
the community and due to favourable response received from the States and UTs, the scheme has been extended to 70
additional districts during 2001-2002 covering 28 States/UTs.
STRENGTHENING OF IMMUNISATION PROGRAMME AND ERADICATION OF POLIO
Recommendation/Observation
6.2       The Committee is deeply anguished to find that a cut in the allocation at the RE stage was made due to delay in
procurement of equipment and stores. The Committee feels that such delays seriously affect the implementation of
Family Welfare Programmes. It, therefore, recommends that the Department should inquire into as to whether this delay
could have been avoided and if so, the responsibility should be fixed in this regard. It should also take extra precaution
so that such delays are avoided in future. 
Action Taken
The views of the Standing Committee have been noted for future compliance.
Further Comments
The Committee was informed that the delay in the procurement of Cold Chain equipment during the year was on
account of the following reasons:
1.         The procurement plans for all the three years under the Immunisation Strengthening Project were submitted to
the World Bank and approved in March 2000. However, World Bank in their review during 2001 suggested clubbing of
the procurement of cold chain items for year 2 (2000-2001) and year 3 (2002-2003).  This took some time and the
detailed consignee addresses and qualities could be made available to Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation
(HSCC), the National Procurement Support Agency (NPSA) in this case only in September 2001.
2.         After floating of the bids, World Bank insisted on changing the qualification criterion, i.e. the bidders experience
from an earlier 20% requirement to 50% requirement. This issue was taken up with the World Bank and after receiving
clarifications from World Bank, HSCC was advised in November 2001, to change the qualification criterion. As a result
of this change in qualification criterion, there was delay in opening of the bids. for various items of equipments.
3.         It will thus be seen that the delay in procurement of the various items for 2001-2002 was largely on account of
changes in conditions as laid down by the World Bank, firstly for clubbing the procurement for two years and secondly

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
for the change of the qualification criterion.
4.         The procurement for the year II (2001-02) of cold chain equipment, which takes into account the backlog, has
been finalised except the procurement of  Ice-lined Refrigerators (ILR) and Deep Freezers (Small) in which the process
will be completed shortly.  Bids for the year III (2002-03) of cold chain equipment are due for opening in December
2002 and January 2003.
Recommendation/Observation
6.3       In case of Pulse-Polio Immunization, the Committee notes that the All India achievement in 1997-98 was 93.9%
which increased to 98.2% in 2000-2001. However, in Bihar, Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland, the achievement is
around 50%. In case of Measles Vaccination, the Committee is constrained to note that the All-India achievement in
2000-2001 is 92.1% but the States like Bihar, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Nagaland failed to achieve even 50%
of its target . In case of BCG vaccination and DPT Immunization the Committee is happy to note that the All-India
achievement is more than 100%. However, again Bihar, Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland are the low-performing
States. The same can be said about DPT Immunization coverage.
 
The Committee observes that the States like Bihar, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Nagaland continue to
perform much below the national average over the years in all the immunization programmes. Another disturbing
feature noticed by the Committee is the downward trend in the percentage of coverage during the last three years of
Ninth Plan in respect of some States. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should identify such
States as are performing below the national average and take special steps to strengthen the immunization scheme in
such States.
Action Taken
As regards Pulse Polio Immunization, the States of Bihar, Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland have also reported
near 100% coverage due to vigorous campaign.
The Committee has recommended that the Department should identify such low performing States and take
special steps to strengthen the immunization scheme in such States. In this connection, it is stated that such low
performing States have already been identified and steps taken to strengthen the immunization schemes in these States.
Under Reproductive and Child Health Care (RCH) Outreach Scheme, 50 districts in low performing 8 States were given
additional support in 2000-2001 to improve the quality of outreach vaccination sessions, social mobilization, mobility
support, alternate vaccine delivery system. This scheme was extended to additional 101 districts in various States in
2001-2002.  Under the Immunization Strengthening Project, funds have been given to all the States for improving
monitoring of the routine immunization programme, for organizing review meetings and mobility support. Various
training programmes have also been initiated to train State/district and field level functionaries to improve the
management as well as quality of implementation of routine immunization programme.
POST PARTUM PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
7.1       Giving reasons, the Department has replied that the Planning Commission has decided to transfer the Post
Partum Programme to the States/UTs w.e.f. 1.4.2002. The Committee would be interested to know as to the precise
reasons that weighed in favour of transfer of this Programme to the States/UTs.
Action Taken
The Expenditure Finance Committee, while considering the revision of norms for maintenance of infrastructure,
had suggested that the States should be asked to take over the Post Partum Centres in the Tenth Plan. However, initially
this Department did not agree to this proposal with the reason that taking out one component would not be feasible. But
subsequently, with the bifurcation of one Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) of National Family Welfare Programme
into 54 different Centrally Sponsored Schemes, this Department agreed to the recommendation of the Core Committee
of Planning Commission for transfer of this Scheme to the States.
AREA PROJECTS
Recommendation/Observation

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
9.3       The Committee is perturbed to note the reasons behind cut in RE 2001-2002. The Committee feels that reasons
like slow implementation of a project and delay in finalisation of cost bifurcation etc. reflect administrative
inexpediency and, therefore, recommends that the Department should take necessary steps to avoid such procedural
delays in future. It also gives an impression that the Project is not being effectively implemented.
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. However, it may be mentioned that the
Expenditure Finance Committee chaired by Secretary (FW) in its meetings held on 27.3.2002 and 30.4.2002 has
approved the revision of cost and extension of the project period of German assisted Basic Health Project in
Maharashtra and DANIDA assisted Health & Family Project in Tamil Nadu respectively. The cost bifurcation between
Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh under DANIDA assisted Basic Health and Family Project has also been finalised,
agreement signed and money is being released to Chhattisgarh to implement the project activities. The Ministry is also
vigorously monitoring the implementation of DANIDA assisted Project in Madhya Pradesh and UNFPA assisted
Integrated Population and Development Projects. In order to minimize procedural delays and to ensure effective
implementation of the Area Projects, the Ministry will further strengthen its monitoring mechanism by having more
review meetings with the concerned State Governments and donor agencies.
INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION
Recommendation/Observation
10.4     The Committee notes with appreciation the steps taken by the Department in involving local people for
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities. The Committee, however, feels that such decentralisation
of fund allocation sometimes results in misuse/ misappropriation of funds and, therefore, recommends that the
Department should keep a strict vigil on the utilisation of funds by the district and local authorities.
Action Taken
The Committee is informed that through guidelines, several checks, such as expenditure as per approved action
plan, no capital assets to be purchased, recovery in the event of not utilizing funds for approved purposes, etc., are in
place to monitor the programme. Ministry keeps strict vigil to verify the accounts through submission of audited
accounts and utilisation certificates, expenditure and performance reports called for from the States/UTs. The States are
sending the above documents after compiling the same at State Headquarters.    It is added here that officers visiting the
States are also provided with briefs to monitor the activities.
The Zila Saksharta Samitis in the States, whom the Ministry provides the funds for Information, Education and
Communication activities under RCH, are societies under the Ministry of HRD and they also send audited accounts,
utilisation certificates and performance report regularly.
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
INTRODUCTION
Recommendation/Observation
1.6       The Committee notes that though there is a marginal increase in the case of sterilisation and C.C. users, the
number of IUD insertions and O.P. users has decreased in the year 2000-2001, in comparison to 1999-2000. The
Committee feels that in the case of sterilisation, the number of male sterilisation is much below the desired level and
recommends that the Department should take appropriate steps so that the participation of males is increased in Family
Planning methods.
Action Taken
To increase male participation in the family planning programme, the Department has introduced No Scalpel
Vasectomy (NSV) Programme. This method is an improvement over the conventional method with practically no side-
effect or complication. To ensure the availability of this new technique at the peripheral levels, efforts are being made to

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
train the doctors in NSV technique. So far,  295 NSV Training sessions have been held in 20 States and 1146 doctors
have been trained in this technique. Of this, 1048 doctors have been certified  as NSV providers and 47 doctors have
been certified as NSV State Trainers. The training is still going on and proposes to cover all the States by the end of this
year.          
Moreover, during 2002-2003, a new scheme namely Male Participation has been included primarily for bringing
about gender equality since in most of the societies, men exercise preponderant power in nearly every sphere of life,
ranging from personal decisions regarding size of the families to the policy and programme decisions.  Under the
innovative new scheme of Male Participation, special efforts are to be made to emphasize men’s shared responsibility
and promote their active involvement in responsible parenthood, sexual and reproductive behaviour, including family
planning.  The budget provision for this scheme during 2002-03 is Rs.2.00 crores.
Further Comments
On a query as to how many cases of No Scalpel Vasectomy (NSV) has been undergone, the Committee was
informed that a total of 49,153 cases of No Scalpel Vasectomy (NSV) were reported in the year 2001-02. The State-wise
details are as follows:
Sl. No. States & Courses No. of Acceptors
1. Andhra Pradesh 42742
2. Gujarat 102
3. Haryana 13
4. Jammu & Kashmir 25
5. Karnataka 317
6. Madhya Pradesh 2723
7. Maharashtra 25
8. Manipur 103
9. Punjab 9
10. Sikkim 285
11. Tamil Nadu 125
12. Uttar Pradesh 196
13. West Bengal 26
14. Delhi 1976
Sl. No. States & Courses No. of Acceptors
15. FPAI, Mumbai 118
16. Other NGOs in Delhi 368
 TOTAL: 49153
 
The Department further informed that the Government has made all out efforts to give wide publicity to this
technique by using the print, electronic media and through advertisements by way of bill-boards, hand-bills, hoardings
and banners. An NSV stall is always organised in all Health Melas. Out of total provision of Rs.1.50 crores during
2001-2002, an amount of Rs.1.06 crore was spent on publicity alone. Besides this, NSV publicity material is distributed
to public during NSV training and promotion of NSV through interpersonal communication between the health staff and
public.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee observes that there is a need for radical transformation in the methods of publicity
through the media.   There is altogether a need for changing the contents of slogans, yellow colour plan and the
triangle associated with it has been  rendered outdated.   There is need for something new and with contents and
colour acceptable to human minds which always seeks something new.   The services of NGOs, publicity films,
poets, dialogue writers should be  hired to get what could be acceptable to human mind.   After all, the purpose of
publicity is to change the human psychology to bring them round to our views.   Unless this is changed radically,
the chances of success in our mission are bleak.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
Recommendation/Observation
2.4       The Committee agrees, in principle, with the Department’s contention of there being no case for resorting to a
cut of Rs.700.00 crores at the RE stage in 2001-2002 by the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee also notes that total
plan allocation of Rs.3700.00 crores in 2001-2002 is anticipated to be utilised. Actual expenditure figures are not
available at present. The Committee, however, observes that during 2000-2001, against a higher projected requirement,
plan allocation was Rs.3500.00 crores which was reduced to Rs.3200.00 crores at the RE stage. Actual expenditure was
even less i.e. Rs.3071.35 crores. The Committee strongly feels that in view of much higher allocation of Rs.4930.00
crores in 2002-2003, the Department should ensure that funds allocated under various schemes are utilised optimally
and strictly as per the action plan to strengthen its case for higher allocation.
Action Taken
As against the RE of Rs.3700.00 crores, the anticipated expenditure for the year 2001-2002 is about Rs.3678.00
crore. For the year 2002-2003, as against the BE of Rs.4930.00 crores, every effort is being made by the Department, by
evenly spreading the pace of expenditure, to ensure that whole allocation is optimally utilised.
Further Comments
The Committee has been informed that the actual expenditure during the year 2001-2002, out of RE of
Rs.3700.00 crores, was Rs.3613.94 crores. The actual expenditure upto September 2002 against BE of Rs.4930.00
crores during 2002-2003, is Rs.1812.44 crores.  The expenditure   as on 30
th November 2002 is  Rs.2479.04 crores
which accounts for 50.28 % of the outlay.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee notes that the Department was able to spend only half of the outlay made in 2002-2003 by
the end of third quarter of the financial year.   The Committee feels, it is quite disturbing tendency to go on
spending spree and utilize rest half of the money in the remaining three months.   It is not a healthy practice and
reflects poorly on the performance of the Department.   The Committee therefore, recommends that the moneys
should be spent as per the expenditure norms and quite judiciously so as to avoid rush-spending, in such sensitive
areas as family welfare.
RURAL FAMILY WELFARE SERVICES
Recommendation/Observation
3.4       The Committee is surprised to note that a final decision has already been taken by the Department inspite of
there being no consensus on this issue among the States. According to the Department itself, outcome of implementation
of SWAP proposal will be that some States will be in an advantageous position by saving the funds and some States in a
disadvantageous position.  For example, as per the information made available to the Committee, whereas additional
liability in the case of Chandigarh will be only Rs.7 lakhs, for West Bengal it will be as high as Rs.17.74 crores. The
Committee wonders about the fate of Rural Family Welfare Centres in view of no allocation being made by the
Department in BE 2002-2003. The Committee would, therefore, like to emphasise that the issue of compensating the
affected States should be sorted out at the earliest.
Action Taken
In the National Development Council meeting held on 1.9.2001 chaired by the  Prime Minister, it was decided to
transfer the Rural Family Welfare Centres Scheme to the States/UTs which was communicated by Planning
Commission vide D.O.No.M-11011/ 1/2001-PC dated 30 January 2002. The same was communicated to the States/UTs
vide letter No. G2011/1/2002-PA dated 16 April 2002.
The matter was discussed in the meeting with Secretaries of the States on 21
st and 22nd June, 2001 wherein the
SWAP scheme was explained and it was mentioned that the proposal is budget neutral. The Planning Commission has
agreed to compensate those States which will need additional funds on account of this SWAP.
Comments of the Committee
            Decision to transfer the Rural Family Welfare Centres of the States and UTs taken by the National
Development Council was communicated to the Department on 30
th January, 2002; it was further communicated

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
by the Department to States and UTs on 16th April, 2002 i.e. after two and a-half month.   The Committee fails to
see any convincing reason for this avoidable delay in passing on  a crucial decision  to States, and feels that such
an attitude would be antithetical to effective and timely implementation of the schemes.
Recommendation/Observation
3.12     The Committee recommends that the Department should take necessary steps to achieve the target of setting up
of Sub-Centres, PHCs and CHCs. The Committee also fails to understand as to how such a large number of States have
failed to achieve the target of setting up of Sub-Centres, PHCs and CHCs and therefore, recommends that the
Department should try to find out the reasons behind this phenomenon.
Action Taken
Department of Family Welfare has issued letter to the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, 
which is the nodal Ministry for monitoring, requesting it to ascertain and intimate the issues and reasons of non-
achievement of the targets in the States. Department of Family Welfare  has also issued letters to the States for
providing reasons for non-achievement of targets.  States have been requested to nominate nodal officer for the purpose
of correspondence for collection of latest data.
The views expressed by some of the States have been given at Para No.3.10.
Comments of the Committee
            The entire issue of setting up of Sub-Centres, Primary Health Centres and the Community Health Centres
appears to have been  caught up in a serious logjam created by the involvement of several agencies  - Planning
Commission, Ministry of Statistics  and Programme Implementation and Department of Family Welfare on the
one hand, and the States on the other.    This sorry state of affairs is mainly due to lack of proper and effective
coordination between different agencies as well as due to lack of adequate consultation by the States before fixing
targets etc.   The Committee feels, this is a clear case of left hand not knowing what the right hand was doing.   
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take up this issue with all the agencies
mentioned above for devising an effective monitoring/ coordination mechanism as also for laying down realistic
targets in this regard.   The Department will have to play more proactive role in the whole affair.
Recommendation/Observation
3.15     The Committee is constrained to note that the figures given by the Department are not updated and pertain to the
period varying from 1994 to 2001. In respect of some States like Bihar and Delhi they are  10-15 years old. The
Department has informed that the updated data as on 1
st January, 2001 is not available in respect of some of the States.
The Committee takes a serious view of the lackadaisical approach of the Department in getting the data collected from
various States and desires that these may be obtained and furnished to the Committee at the earliest.
Action Taken
The figures given below show the number of ANMs required, sanctioned, in position, vacant and shortfall as per
the available information in the Department  of Family Welfare :
                                     ANM                LHV
      Required     (R)        160153             22842
      Sanctioned  (S)         148151            23032
      In position  (P)         137407             19855
      Vacant     (S-P)          10765               3257
      Shortfall  (R-P)          24382               3889
Infrastructure and manpower position is being monitored in the Department of Family Welfare on the basis of
Quarterly Progress Reports. It has been observed that many States are providing incomplete and old information.
The States have been repeatedly reminded to submit Quarterly Progress Report in time with latest information.
The States are also reminded to submit latest information when the designated officers visit to the States.

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
The States have been asked to designate a nodal officer for providing the latest information. Four States
(Maharashtra, Uttaranchal, Mizoram and Pondicherry) have intimated the names, telephone and FAX numbers of the
nodal officers. Other States have been reminded to designate a nodal officer for this purpose so that Department   of
Family Welfare was able to interact with them for latest information.  
Further Comments
On a specific query as to  when was the Department likely to furnish the latest information to the Committee, the
Department has informed that the repeated reminders did not yield desired results because multiple agencies were
involved in supply of data for Rural Health Statistics Bulletin (which is collected through Quarterly Progress Reports
Proforma). Therefore, States were requested to designate one nodal officer for regular supply of latest information. So
far, four States have designated nodal officers. The other States are regularly reminded for the same.  Reminders have
been issued to States at the level of Joint Secretary (FW).
Comments of the Committee
The Committee regrets that the Department is finding itself helpless to obtain the latest information
relating to AMNs and LHVs from the States and UTs.   What is more surprising, the Department has failed to
collect the latest figures from Delhi, where it is located.     The Committee fails to understand as to how the
Department is monitoring the scheme when it does not have the latest information.     Delay in collecting the
information because of involvement of multiple agencies in supply of data for Rural Health Statistics Bulletin
notwithstanding, taking 10 to 15 years in collecting the information, cannot be justified on any count.    This is the
plight when at least 400 Districts are connected to NIC's network which could have been utilized for the purpose.
Even the new idea of getting nodal officers designated by the States for regular supply   of latest
information does not inspire enough confidence, as only four States have, so far, designated nodal officers,
despites reminders by the Department.    The Committee reiterates, that NIC's computer connectivity/video
conferencing facilities may be utilized to obtain the requisite information expeditiously.
Recommendation/Observation
3.16     The Committee feels that ANMs and LHVs are the persons responsible for delivering Family Welfare Services
to rural people and ,therefore, recommends that the Department should make concerted efforts to get the posts of ANMs
and LHVs filled up at the earliest in respect of the low performing States.
Action Taken
In various forums, State Governments are reminded to fill up the vacant posts of ANMs and LHVs.
Further Comments
The Department has informed that 252 posts of ANMs and 179 posts of LHVs were filled during the year 2001.
Vacancy position during 2002 is yet to be received from the States.
Comments of the Committee
            As per the latest figures provided by the Department, the vacancies of ANMs as on 31
st March, 2001 was
10,765 and the shortfall against  the requirement was 24,382.   Similarly, in case of LHVs, the vacancy position as
on 31st March 2001, was 3,257 and the shortfall against the requirement was 3,889.   These figures give a dismal
picture of the performance  of family welfare services to rural population, which is  already deprived of
reasonable medical care.   The Committee recommends that the Department may impress  upon the States/UTs
the need of filling up all the posts of ANMs and LHVs at the earliest and monitor the position regularly.
REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH POGRAMME (RCH)
Recommendation/Observation
5.4       The Committee feels that the under-utilization of funds by the State Governments is quite alarming as it reflects
that the Programme is not being implemented properly at the ground level. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Department should take up the matter with the concerned States and try to find out the reasons behind under-
utilization of funds by them and take necessary remedial measures.
Action Taken

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
The suggestions have been noted for compliance. The States are being persuaded vigorously for gearing up the
pace of implementation and also compiling and reporting the expenditure to Government of India. Nodal Officers of
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have been deputed for each State. The States/UTs were sensitized on this matter
in the recently concluded meeting of Family Welfare Secretaries of States/UTs on 22nd and 23rd May, 2002.
Further Comments
The Department has further informed that the under utilisation of funds in States are due to various reasons.
Expansion of health infrastructure has not kept pace with the increase in population as can be seen from the fact that
reckoned with the 2001 population, the shortfall comes to 25,888 Auxiliary Nurse Midwives (ANMs) whereas the
shortfall is 8,208 ANMs if reckoned with 1991 population. As the ANMs are frontline personnel for delivery of RCH
services, States have been permitted to take on contractual basis 6,256 ANMs, besides 1,369 PHNs at PHC level and
382 Lab. Technicians  alongwith contractual hiring of specialists. For quicker absorption of funds to the field agencies,
the Government of India has adopted the process of releasing funds to the State/District RCH societies constituted for
the purpose in 33 States/UTs in place of usual treasury mechanism. Experience shows that this mechanism has resulted
in availability/non-diversion and better utilisation of funds by the programme officers.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee views the underutilization of funds and resulting tardy implementation of important
schemes as  a serious matter. Department, therefore, should make all out efforts to pursue States to gear up their
machinery in this regard.
Recommendation/Observation
            Noting the efforts made by the Department, the Committee feels that though some progress has been made in
respect of Infant mortality rate, percentage of safe delivery etc., they are still very high in comparison to even a number
of developing countries. Some States like Assam, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa and Rajasthan continue
to perform much below the national average in this regard.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should make extra efforts to improve the performance in these States. (Para No.5.8)
Action Taken
The Government is implementing a number of programmes through its various sectors for improving the
nutritional status and health of women and children, which will ultimately reduce mortality rate. The Department of
Family Welfare has already initiated various steps to reduce the mortality in infants and children. The most recent
initiative is the Reproductive and Child Health Programme launched in 1997.    It includes all the components of Child
Survival and Safe Motherhood (CSSM) scheme with additional emphasis on breast-feeding and nutrition.
Under the current RCH Programme, some of the important interventions, which are under implementation, are
as follows:
(a)
    Essential Obstetric Care
(b)   Emergency Obstetric Care
(c)    24-Hour Delivery Services at PHC & CHC
(d)   Dai Training
(e)    RCH Camps
(f)     New Born Care.
The Department of Women and Child Development has been implementing the Integrated Child Development
Services, nutrition component of Pradhan Mantri Gramodaya Yojana and Nutrition Education Programmes of Food and
Nutrition Board to improve the overall nutritional status of the young children and pregnant/nursing women. Under the
National Nutritional Anaemia Control Programme of the Government of India, Iron and Folic Acid tablets are
distributed to high-risk groups. The Department of Rural Development and Targeted Public Distribution System of
Ministry of Food are also taking some steps in this direction.
An Empowered Action Group has been constituted under the chairmanship of the Union Health and Family

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
Welfare Minister for focussed attention on improving the coverage and outreach of services in the eight States of Uttar
Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Bihar, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh.
            A statement showing Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) in India and selected developing countries  and safe delivery 
rate in India and certain poor  performing States of India is  given separately under two tables at Annexure-I.
 In order to improve the Safe Delivery Rate in the country, a Scheme for training Dais has been initiated in 142
districts in 17 States having safe delivery rate of less than 30% during the year 2000-01. The identified States are Assam
(9 districts), Arunachal Pradesh (9 districts), Bihar (32 districts), Jharkhand (9 districts), Gujarat (1 district), Jammu and
Kashmir (2 districts), Madhya Pradesh (18 districts), Mizoram (1 district), Nagaland (3 districts), Orissa (14 districts),
Rajasthan (6 districts), Sikkim (2 districts), Uttar Pradesh (33 districts) and West Bengal (3 districts).
During 2000-01, the scheme has been further extended to 8 more districts of Jammu and Kashmir, 5 districts of
West Bengal and the Union Territory of Andaman & Nicobar Islands.
Comments of the Committee
The steps taken by the Government in respect of Infant Mortality Rate(IMR) seem to be in the right
direction, while much more needs to be done in this field.    The Committee  feels that the Department should  
strengthen the measures in this regard in consultation with other concerned Ministries/Departments and monitor
the implementation of this programme more vigorously.   Besides this, necessary steps may be taken to make the
people aware of the scheme at large scale with a view to achieving the desired results.
 REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH PROGRAMME (RCH)
Recommendation/Observation
5.9       The Committee notes that a special scheme ‘Transportation of Pregnant Women’ belonging to indigent families
to the nearest referral centres is being implemented in 25% Sub-centres in ‘C’ category districts in 12 States. The
Committee has been informed that the feedback from the States has not been encouraging, as the funds released are not
being utilised by the Panchayats. Twenty four hour Delivery Services is another initiative to promote institutional
deliveries under which additional honorarium is provided to the staff to encourage round the clock delivery services at
PHCs and CHCs. The Committee is, however, constrained to note that out of Rs. 1002.35 lakhs released to the States, so
far, an expenditure of only Rs.51.26 lakhs (which comes to mere 5%) has been reported. In its 101
st Report also the
Committee had commented on the poor performance of these two schemes. The Committee feels that the Department
should approach the concerned   States for bringing out the necessary improvements/modifications in the schemes for 
better implementation of the same.
Action Taken
The Scheme of Referral Transport for pregnant women belonging to indigent families has now been extended to
all the States/UTs in 25% Sub-Centres in the C category districts. The Scheme envisages active involvement of
Panchayats. The funds are placed at the disposal of the Panchayat. The feedback on the scheme has not been
encouraging mainly due to lack of efforts on the part of State/district authorities to create awareness in the community
and coordinate with Panchayat members. States/UTs have been requested to encourage and motivate the Panchayat
members to seek their active involvement for the effective implementation of the scheme.
24 Hour Delivery Services is an initiative under the RCH Programme to promote institutional deliveries by
providing honorarium to Doctors, Nurses and cleanliness staff for conducting deliveries beyond normal working hours.
Out of Rs.1002.35 lakhs released to States/UTs under the scheme, expenditure reports to the tune of Rs.127.27 lakhs
have been received. Initially, the scheme was slow in taking off, however, as per reports available now, there is an
improvement in the implementation in the States like Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Chandigarh, Mizoram and Uttar Pradesh. Other States/UTs are being encouraged to take
initiative in promotion of 24 hour delivery services.
Comments of the Committee
Under the scheme of Referral Transport for Pregnant women, funds are placed at the disposal of
Panchayats.    However, as per the feedback available in this regard, the implementation of this scheme is not
effective as there is no active involvement of Panchayats and proper coordination between the States/Districts on
the one hand and the   Panchayats on the other. The Committee observes that the scheme cannot be successful

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
without the active involvement of the Panchayats and the States, which are responsible for implementation of the
scheme.   They, therefore need to be sensitized more and more for this purpose.
The Committee expresses   its concern with regard to the implementation of the scheme of 24 hour
Delivery Services in case utilization of funds is any indication.    Against the allocated funds of  Rs. 1002.35 lakhs,
the expenditure reported is merely Rs.127.27 lakhs.    The scheme needs to be effectively implemented.
DISTRIBUTION OF CONTRACEPTIVES
Recommendation/Observation
8.3       In regard to the quality of Nirodh, the Committee has been given to understand that 19% users have rated it
under free supply scheme as okay, 75% as good and 6% have rated as very good. The Committee feels that the quality
of condoms goes a long way in its acceptance by the users.  The Committee is also of the view that poor quality may
lead to unwanted pregnancy and reproductive tract infections.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Departments should ensure that only the best quality of latex is used in manufacturing of condoms.
Action Taken
Department of Family Welfare entrusted a study on ‘Use and Wastage of Nirodh under Nominal Levy Scheme
in Certain States’ to National Institute of Health & Family Welfare (NIHFW), New Delhi in 2001.  The provisional
report mentions about the information the study collected about the quality of Nirodh under free supply scheme.   These
percentages are based on the provisional study report furnished to the Department in September 2001.
Department of Family Welfare takes care of the quality of condoms provided to the users under the Free Supply
Scheme as well as under the Social Marketing Programme.   To ensure the quality, the samples from each and every
batch are got tested from approved laboratories before supply is accepted from the manufacturers.   The condoms are
tested as per schedule ‘R’ of Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, revised from time to time.   The condoms procured by
Government of India are of international standard and no compromise is done in the matter of quality.
Further, to ensure the quality, as the condoms have a shelf life of 4 years, special attempts are made to collect
samples of these Nirodh from the field by Regional Directors and get them tested in the approved laboratories only,
from time to time.  In case of any failure, the supply of that particular batch is immediately stopped and manufacturer of
the batch is asked to replace the whole batch immediately on his own cost.   Thus, the quality aspects are rigorously
observed and monitored in respect of condoms being supplied both under Free Supply and Social Marketing Schemes.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee observes that there is a need to develop a mechanism  to determine the extent of stocks of
condoms which remain unutilized or are wasted due to expiry of date in the various outlets in and outside 
Government Departments. Once this mechanism is developed, production lines could be oriented accordingly.
Quality of condom could also be improved by doing away with the wastages and without affecting the budget.   
The Committee further observes that certain percentage of condoms could also be sold at economical rates by
installing condom vending machines in public toilets, toilets of restaurants, cinema halls, theatres and such
other   public places.   Much more needs to be done to contain the rising population by devising incentives  in
every field of national life.
NEW INITIATIVES
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee feels that the problem of exponential growth of population is the mother of all the problems of
this country. No matter, howsoever high is the growth rate of national economy, it will be insufficient to meet the
economic needs of the people if the rate of population growth is not arrested. The Committee is of the considered view
that unless the factors which are contributory to the uncontrolled growth of population, such as illiteracy particularly in
women, poverty etc. are appropriately addressed, we will have no escape from this unfortunate situation. All the
political parties/groups owe their duty to the country to sit together and evolve a consensus in this regard. (Para No.
11.2)
Action Taken
The strategies in the National Population Policy 2000, are under implementation in consultation with the States

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
and other stake-holders.  Currently, all such schemes and programmes are being undertaken which attempt to achieve
the immediate objectives of the National Population Policy 2000, to address the unmet needs for contraception, health
care infrastructure, health personnel and to provide integrated service delivery for basic reproductive and child health
care.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee is constrained to observe that unless adequate steps are taken to contain the population,
the explosion of population will defeat the very purpose of planning.   At the same time much more needs to be
done in the field of Health care.   The plight of hospitals, at least in the  metros,  leaves much to be desired.  
Likewise, there is need for considerable improvement in the field of education.
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
                                                                                             NIL
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT  BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee observes that there is a need for radical transformation in the methods of publicity
through the media.   There is altogether a need for changing the contents of slogans, yellow colour plan and the
triangle associated with it has been  rendered outdated.   There is need for something new and with contents and
colour acceptable to human minds which always seeks something new.   The services of NGOs, publicity films,
poets, dialogue writers should be  hired to get what could be acceptable to human mind.   After all, the purpose of
publicity is to change the human psychology to bring them round to our views.   Unless this is changed radically,
the chances of success in our mission are bleak. (Para 1.6)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee notes that the Department was able to spend only half of the outlay made in 2002-2003 by
the end of third quarter of the financial year.   The Committee feels, it is quite disturbing tendency-to go on
spending spree and utilize rest half of the money in the remaining three months.   It is not a healthy practice and
reflects poorly on the performance of the Department.   The Committee therefore, recommends that the moneys
should be spent as per the expenditure norms and quite judiciously so as to avoid rush-spending, in such sensitive
areas as family welfare. (Para 2.4)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            Decision to transfer the Rural Family Welfare Centres of the States and UTs taken by the National
Development Council was communicated to the Department on 30
th January, 2002; it was further communicated
by the Department to States and UTs on 16th April, 2002 i.e. after two and a-half month.   The Committee fails to
see any convincing reason for this avoidable delay in passing on  a crucial decision  to States, and feels that such
an attitude would be antithetical to effective and timely implementation of the schemes. (Para 3.4)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The entire issue of setting up of Sub-Centres, Primary Health Centres and the Community Health Centres
appears to have been  caught up in a serious logjam created by the involvement of several agencies  - Planning
Commission, Ministry of Statistics  and Programme Implementation and Department of Family Welfare on the

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
one hand, and the States on the other.    This sorry state of affairs is mainly due to lack of proper and effective
coordination between different agencies as well as due to lack of adequate consultation by the States before fixing
targets etc.   The Committee feels, this is a clear case of left hand not knowing what the right hand was doing.   
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take up this issue with all the agencies
mentioned above for devising an effective monitoring/ coordination mechanism as also for laying down realistic
targets in this regard.   The Department will have to play more proactive role in the whole affair. (Para 3.12)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE      
The Committee regrets that the Department is finding itself helpless to obtain the latest information
relating to AMNs and LHVs from the States and UTs.   What is more surprising, the Department has failed to
collect the latest figures from Delhi, where it is located.     The Committee fails to understand as to how the
Department is monitoring the scheme when it does not have the latest information.     Delay in collecting the
information because of involvement of multiple agencies in supply of data for Rural Health Statistics Bulletin
notwithstanding, taking 10 to 15 years in collecting the information, cannot be justified on any count.    This is the
plight when at least 400 Districts are connected to NIC's network which could have been utilized for the purpose.
Even the new idea of getting nodal officers designated by the States for regular supply  of latest information does
not inspire enough confidence, as only four States have, so far, designated nodal officers, despites reminders by
the Department.   The Committee reiterates, that NIC's computer connectivity/video conferencing facilities may
be utilized to obtain the requisite information expeditiously. (Para 3.15)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            As per the latest figures provided by the Department, the vacancies of ANMs as on 31
st March, 2001 was
10,765  and the shortfall against  the requirement was 24,382.   Similarly, in case of LHVs, the vacancy position
as on 31 st March 2001, was 3,257 and the shortfall against the requirement was 3,889.   These figures give a
dismal picture of the performance   of family welfare services to rural population, which is  already deprived of
reasonable medical care.   The Committee recommends that the Department may impress  upon the States/UTs
the need of filling up all the posts of ANMs and LHVs at the earliest and monitor the position regularly. (Para
3.16)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee views the underutilization of funds and resulting tardy implementation of important
schemes as  a serious matter. Department, therefore, should make all out efforts to pursue States to gear up their
machinery in this regard. (Para 5.4)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The steps taken by the Government in respect of Infant Mortality Rate(IMR) seem to be in the right
direction, while much more needs to be done in this field.    The Committee  feels that the Department should  
strengthen the measures in this regard in consultation with other concerned Ministries/Departments and monitor
the implementation of this programme more vigorously.   Besides this, necessary steps may be taken to make the
people aware of the scheme at large scale with a view to achieving the desired results. (Para 5.8)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
Under the scheme of Referral Transport for Pregnant women, funds are placed at the disposal of
Panchayats.    However, as per the feedback available in this regard, the implementation of this scheme is not
effective as there is no active involvement of Panchayats and proper coordination between the States/Districts on
the one hand and the   Panchayats on the other. The Committee observes that the scheme cannot be successful
without the active involvement of the Panchayats and the States, which are responsible for implementation of the
scheme.   They, therefore need to be sensitized more and more for this purpose.
The Committee expresses   its concern with regard to the implementation of the scheme of 24 hour
Delivery Services in case utilization of funds is any indication.    Against the allocated funds of  Rs. 1002.35 lakhs,
the expenditure reported is merely Rs.127.27 lakhs.    The scheme needs to be effectively implemented. (Para 5.9)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
            The Committee observes that there is a need to develop a mechanism  to determine the extent of stocks of
condoms which remain unutilized or are wasted due to expiry of date in the various outlets in and outside 
Government Departments. Once this mechanism is developed, production lines could be oriented accordingly.
Quality of condom could also be improved by doing away with the wastages and without affecting the budget.   
The Committee further observes that certain percentage of condoms could also be sold at economical rates by
installing condom vending machines in public toilets, toilets of restaurants, cinema halls, theatres and such
other   public places.   Much more needs to be done to contain the rising population by devising incentives  in
every field of national life. (Para 8.3)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee is constrained to observe that unless adequate steps are taken to contain the population,
the explosion of population will defeat the very purpose of planning.   At the same time much more needs to be
done in the field of Health care.   The plight of hospitals, at least in the  metros,  leaves much to be desired.  
Likewise, there is need for considerable improvement in the field of education. (Para 11.2)
ANNEXURE
STATEMENT SHOWING INFANT MORTALITY RATE AND PERCENTAGE OF BIRTHS WITH SKILLED
ATTENDANTS IN INDIA AND SELECTED DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
 
Selected Developing countries Infant Mortality Rate per 1000
live births
(%) Births with skilled attendants
India 65 43
China 37 67
Indonesia 40 56
Thailand 21 NA.
Srilanka 20 94
Philippines 29 56
Vietnam 34 77
Malaysia 10 96
 
 
Source: The State of World Population 2001 (UNFPA Publication)
 
STATEMENT SHOWING INFANT MORTALITY RATE AND PERCENTAGE OF
SAFE DELIVERY (BIRTHS BY SKILLED ATTENDANTS) IN INDIA AND
SELECTED  STATES IN INDIA
 
Selected States/All India Infant Mortality Rate per 1000 live
births
(%) Safe delivery (Births with
skilled attendants)
India 67.8 42.3
Assam 69.5 21.4
Bihar 72.9 23.4
Madhya Pradesh 86.1 29.7
Uttar Pradesh 86.7 22.4
Orissa 81.0 33.4
Rajasthan 80.4 35.8
 
 
Source: National Family Health Survey-II (1998-99)

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
MINUTES
FIRST  MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 8 th  January, 2003 in Committee Room No. 53, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
46. Shri Eduardo Faleiro     ¾¾    in the Chair
MEMBERS
            RAJYA  SABHA
 
47. Shri Bachani Lekhraj
48. Shri Lalhmingliana
49. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
50. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
 
LOK SABHA
 
51. Shri Kirti Jha Azad
52. Shri G. S. Basavaraj
53. Shri Ram Rati Bind
54. Shri Baliram Kashyap
55. Shri Brij Lal Khabri
56. Shri Y.G. Mahajan
57. Dr. Manda Jagannath
58. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
59. Dr. N. Venkataswamy
60. Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
 
            SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
 
2.       Shri Eduardo Faleiro , M.P. Rajya Sabha  chaired the meeting in the absence of the Chairman. To begin with, the
Committee took up for consideration the Quarterly Report for the first two quarters  on physical and financial
achievements of Department of  Health. The Committee noted underutilization of funds provided under various
schemes/ programmes. However, after some discussion, the Committee decided to defer consideration of Quarterly
Reports in respect of all the Departments/ Ministries within its purview till the same are received for the third quarter
also as they are also due.   
3.        The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 117
th Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants for 2002-2003 relating to Department. of Family Welfare and  identified the following
points/issues for clarifications from the Department:
 
(i)
                  Variations in the cases of No Scalpel Vasectomy (NSV)  during 2001-2002;
(ii)                 Low Male participation in Family Planning;
(iii)               Proposal of the  Government, if any, to introduce the concept of incentives and disincentives with
respect to Family Planning on the lines of practice presently being followed in China; and
(iv)              Remedial steps to be taken in respect of the states which are lagging behind in implementation of
Family Planning programmes.
 
3.1              The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 118 th Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants for 2002-2003 relating to Department of Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy and

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
identified the following points/issues for clarifications from the Department:
 
(i)                  Underutilization  grant-in-aid to state Pharmacies and Laboratories by the states of  Rajasthan,
UttarPradesh, Uttranchal, Orissa , West Bengal, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, Chattisgadh, and Jammu &
Kashmir and non-fulfillment of code formalities by them.
(ii)                Non-filling of posts in the Department of ISM&H.
(iii)               Non-increase in bed capacity in National Institute of Homoeopathy.
 
3.2              The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 119 th Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants for 2002-2003 relating to Department of Elementary Education and Literacy   and identified the
following points/issues for clarifications from the Department:
 
(i)
                  Accuracy of the NSSO survey with regard to increase in literacy rate among SCs/STs and educational
minorities in 1999-2000 as compared to 1991.
(ii)                Efficacy of  the present mechanism to check diversion of funds released by Central Govt. for a particular
scheme/programme and modifications, if any, required in it.
(iii)               Proposal of the Government, if any, for qualitative and quantitative improvement in the Mid Day Meal
Scheme and the Department’s plan to implement the Judgement of the Supreme Court in this regard.
(iv)              Assessment/study, if any, made with regard to the drop-out rate of students at a particular place prior to the
implementation of DPEP and after its implementation.
(v)                Association of local MPs in the construction  of DPEP school buildings.
 
4.         The Committee, then, adjourned at  12.30 P.M. for lunch  and then again adjourned at 4.30 P.M. to meet   again
at 11 A.M. on Thursday, the  9th January, 2003.
 
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 7 th April, 2003 in Committee Room `A`,  First Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
1.         Dr. Manda Jagannath    ¾¾    in the Chair
 
MEMBERS
            RAJYA  SABHA
 
2.                  Dr. Akhilesh Das
3.                  Shri B.P. Apte
4.                  Shri Bachani Lekhraj
5.                  Prof. R.B.S. Varma
6.                  Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik
7.                  Shri Lalhmingliana
8.                  Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey
9.                  Smt. Vanga Geetha
 
LOK SABHA
 
10.
              Shri Ram Rati Bind
11.              Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria
12.              Shri Baliram Kashyap
13.              Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
14.              Shri S.B.P.B.K.Satyanarayana Rao
15.              Dr. N. Venkataswamy

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
 
2.          In the absence of the Chairman, Dr. Manda Jagannath  was voted to the Chair.
 
3.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up 
consideration of the following Reports:
 
(i)
                  One Hundred twenty-fifth Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred sixteenth Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of Health;
 
(ii)
                One Hundred twenty-sixth Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred seventeenth Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of Family Welfare;
 
(iii)
               One Hundred twenty-seventh Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred eighteenth Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and
Homoeopathy;
 
(iv)
              One Hundred twenty-eighth Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred-nineteenth Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of Elementary Education and Literacy;
 
(v)
                One Hundred twenty-ninth Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred twentieth Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of Secondary and Higher Education;
 
(vi)
              One Hundred thirtieth Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in One Hundred twenty-first Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003)
relating to the Department of Women and Child Development;
 
(vii)             One Hundred thirty-first Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in One Hundred twenty-second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003)
relating to the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports;
 
(viii)
           One Hundred thirty-second   Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred fourteenth Report of the Committee on
Implementation of Elementary Education Schemes;
 
(ix)              One Hundred thirty-third   Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred twelfth Report of the Committee on Medical
Education; and
 
(x)                One Hundred thirty-fourth   Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred thirteenth Report of the Committee on
Technical Education.

126thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report126th.htm[01-07-2016 16:03:41]
 
4.         After some discussion,  the Committee adopted the above reports. The Committee also decided that these 
Report may be presented to Rajya Sabha and /laid in Lok Sabha  on the 10 th April, 2003.  The Committee, in this
connection, authorized the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence Prof. R.B.S. Varma and  Smt. Chandra Kala
Pandey  to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and  Dr. M. Jagannath and in his absence Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit
to lay the same in the Lok Sabha. 
 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 P.M.
 