 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022 /Agrahayana, 1944, (Saka)  
 
 
 
 
 
Report No 
343 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND         REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken Note on 311th Report of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on HRD on the Subject Khelo India Scheme 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on……......., 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020) 
THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three 
Hundred Thirty Sixth Report on Demands for Grants 2022-23 of 
the Department of School Education & Literacy, Ministry of 
Education 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in  

 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Thirty 
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants 2022-23 of the Department of School 
Education & Literacy, Ministry of Education 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/Agrahayana,1944(Saka) 
 
 
  


 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ….................................................... (i) 
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................  (ii) 
3.  ACRONYMS.....................................................................................................        (iii)-(v) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…................  1-47 
Chapter-I  -   Recommendations which have been accepted  
 by the Government ............................................................... .....   2-19 
Chapter -II  -  Recommendations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies...........  20-41 
Chapter-III -  Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee....   42-46 
 Chapter-IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government are still awaited…..     47 
   
5. RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE.. ...................    48-49 
6. MINUTES...................................................................................................      50-51 
7. ANNEXURES.............................................................................................. ... 52 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13thSeptember, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
3. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
4. Ms. Sushmita Dev  
5. *Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
6. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
7. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
8. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
9. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
10. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. **Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Sangam Lal Kadedin Gupta 
16. Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
17. Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
18. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
19. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
20. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
21. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
22.  Shri Balak Nath 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
28. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
29.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
30. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
31. Shri S. Venkatesan 
*Nominated w.e.f. 11.10.2022 
**Nominated w.e.f. 16.11.2022 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Smt. Nirmala Bhatt, Joint Secretary 
Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary 
Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer 
(i) 

 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Forty Third Report of the Committee on the Action 
Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred and 
Thirty Sixth  Report on “ Demands for Grants 2022 -23 of the Department of School Education & 
Literacy", which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16th March, 
2022. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations contained in above mentioned Report 
were received from the Ministry of Education (Department of School Education and Literacy) vide 
their communication dated 22nd June, 2022.  
3.  The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on         
15th December, 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
15th December, 2022                                                                                                                
Agrahayana 24,1944 (Saka)
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
                     Shri Vivek Thakur  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports 
  

 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
  
   
AWP&B 
BE 
CABE 
CAG 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Budget Estimates 
Central Advisory Board of Education 
Comptroller and Auditor General 
CBSE 
CGA   
Central Board of Secondary Education 
Controller General of Accounts 
CIET 
CNCL 
COVID 
Central Institute of Educational Technology 
Cell for National Centre for Literacy 
Corona Virus Disease 
CSeS 
CSS 
CWSN 
DBT 
DePWD    
Central Sector Schemes 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
Children With Special Needs 
Direct Benefit Transfer 
Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities 
DIET District Institute of Education and Training 
DIKSHA 
DLI 
Digital Infrastructure For Knowledge Sharing 
Designated Learning Institution 
DSE 
EBBs 
Directorate of School Education 
Educationally Backward Blocks 
EFA 
GAR 
Education for All 
Gross Access Ratio 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GER Gross Enrolment Ratio 
GFR 
GMB 
GIS 
HEIs 
General Financial Rule 
Gandagi Mukt Bharat 
Geographic Information System 
Higher Education Institutions 
ICT 
IHL 
ITIs 
JNVST 
Information and Communication Technology 
Institute of Higher Learning 
Industrial Training Institutes 
Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya Selection Test 
KGBV Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya 
KVS 
LWE 
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan 
Left Wing Extremism 
MIS 
MMMER 
Management Information Systems 
Management Monitoring Media Evaluation and Research 
MoE Ministry of Education  
MOOC Massive Open Online Course  
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MoWCD Ministry of Women and Child Development 
NAS National Achievement Survey 
NCERT National Council of Educational Research and Training 
 
 
 
                (iii)                 
 
 

 
 
 
NCF 
 
National Curriculum Framework 
NFHS 
NFSA 
National Family Health Survey 
National Food Security Act 
NGO 
NILP 
Non-Governmental Organization 
New India Literacy Programme 
NIOS National Institute of Open Schooling 
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 
NMMSS National Means- Cum- Merit Scholarship Scheme 
NEP  
NLMA 
National Education Policy  
National Literacy Mission Authority 
NRF 
NTA 
NTE 
National Research Foundation 
National Testing Agency 
National Teacher's Examination 
NVS 
OoSC 
Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti 
Out of School Children 
OBC Other Backward Classes 
ODL 
OTLAS 
PAB 
PMU 
PSUs 
PAB 
Open and Distance Learning 
Online Teaching Learning and Assessment System 
Project Approval Board 
Project Management Unit 
Public Sector Undertakings 
Project Approval Board 
PARAKH Performance Assessment, Review and Analysis of Knowledge for  
Holistic development 
PFMS  Public Financial Management System 
Ph.D  
PM-POSHAN 
PMS 
POA 
PRABANDH 
 
PWDs 
Doctor of Philosophy 
Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Nirman 
Project Monitoring system 
Programme of Action 
Project Appraisal, Budgeting, Achievements and Data Handling 
System 
Person With Disabilities 
RCI 
RE 
RSK    
Rehabilitation Council of India 
Revised Estimates 
Rashtriya Swachhata Kendra 
RTE Act 
SARTHAQ 
The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009  
Student's and Teacher's Holistic Advancement through Quality 
Education 
SC 
SCERT  
 Scheduled Caste(s) 
State Council of Educational Research & Training 
SDG 
SEDGs 
SHS 
SIG 
SIOS 
 
 
Sustainable Development Goal 
Socio-Economically Disadvantaged Groups 
Swachhata Hi Seva 
Special - Interest Group 
State Institute of Open Schooling 
                     
 
(iv) 

 
 
 
 
SIS 
SLD 
State Implementing Society 
Specific Learning Disability 
SPO State Project Office 
SQAAF 
 
School Quality Assessment and Accreditation Framework 
SSA Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan 
ST Scheduled Tribe(s) 
STARS    
STC                         
SVP 
Strengthening Teaching-Learning and Results for States 
Special Training Centres 
Swachh Vidyalaya Puraskar 
  
SWAYAM Study Webs of Active Learning for Young Aspiring Minds  
TOR Terms of Reference 
U-DISE 
UNICEF 
Unified District Information System for Education 
United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund  
UT Union Territory  
             
 
 
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   (v) 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in its 3 36th Report on “Demands for Grants 2022 -23 of the 
Department of School Education & Literacy”, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on 
the Table of Lok Sabha on 16th March, 2022. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations contained in above mentioned 
Report were received from the Ministry of Education (Department of School Education and 
Literacy) vide their communication dated  22nd June, 2022.  These have been categorized as 
follows.  
Chapter I: Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
Paras –3.1.10, 3.1.12, 3.1.17, 3.1.19, 3.3.5, 3.5.4, 3.6.3, 3.7.1, 3.7.2, 4.1.8 
Total - 10 
Chapter II: Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
Government's replies:- 
Paras – 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 3.1.7, 3.1.8, 3.1.20, 3.2.5, 3.2.7, 3.3.4, 3.4.2, 3.5.4, 
4.1.10, 4.2.9, 4.2.10, 4.1.12 
Total - 16 
Chapter III: Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee:- 
Paras- 3.1.18, 4.1.9, 4. 1.11, 4.2.11 
Total - 4 
       Chapter-IV:  Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government are still 
awaited:- 
Paras - Nil 
Total - Nil 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & 
LITERACY 
SAMAGRA SHIKSHA ABHIYAN 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee recommends that more schools should be opened in hilly Northern region 
States/ North -Eastern States/UTs where there are terrain/resource related difficulties which 
prevent children to take admission in schools.                    (Para: 3.1.10) 
Action Taken 
The Department of School Education and Literacy in its Action Taken Notes informed the 
Committee that education is in the Concurrent List of the Constitution and majority of the schools 
come under the jurisdiction of respective State/ UT Governments - which are the appropriate 
Government under the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009. It 
was also informed that in pursua nce to Section 6 of the RTE Act, the Central RTE Rules had 
notified the area or limits of neighbourhood as one kilometre, within which a primary school and 3 
kilometre within which an upper primary school, has to be established. The States have notified 
area or limits of their neighbourhood norms in their state RTE Rules, factoring in their State 
specific condition, for opening of schools. However, under the Act, it is not mandatory for parents 
to send their children only to the neighbourhood schools. State s may give some preference to 
children within a defined distance. 
 
 For providing universal access to quality secondary education, the neighbourhood norms 
notified by the State/UT are applicable for opening of new Secondary Schools. In the case of the 
States and Union Territories, which have not notified the neighbourhood norms for Secondary 
Schools, Samagra Shiksha provides support for access to secondary schools within a distance of 5 
Km and senior secondary schools within 7 -10 Km of a habitation while en suring their viability 
and cost effectiveness.  As reported by States/UTs in their respective Annual Work Plan and 
Budget, in 2021-22, 97.49% and 97.01% of habitations in the country are covered by Primary and 

3 
 
Upper Primary Schools respectively. Also, 95.4 8% and 90.55% of habitations in the country are 
covered by Secondary and Senior Secondary Schools respectively. 
 
 It was also informed that the habitations that remain uncovered are mostly small or 
sparsely populated in difficult areas where opening of sch ool is not feasible for which there is a 
provision of giving transport and escort facility. The Central Government, through integrated 
centrally sponsored scheme of Samagra Shiksha provides support to the States and UTs for 
opening/ strengthening of school s by giving priority for opening of schools in aspirational 
districts, SC, ST, Minority, LWE Affected Districts and Educationally Backward Blocks along 
with relaxation in national norms for hilly region and North Eastern States. With regard to North 
Eastern Region, at the elementary level, average 93.21% habitations are served by the Primary 
Schools within a radius of 1 km, and 84.49% habitations are served by Upper Primary Schools 
within a radius of 3 km.  At the secondary level, 86.90% of villages were co vered by the 
Secondary Schools within a distance of 5km and 76.52% of villages were covered by the Higher 
Secondary Schools within a distance of 7km  as per GIS mapping exercise conducted at the 
national level, including government, government aided and private schools, in the year 2021-22. 
The North Eastern state wise details of GAR are as under: 
North Eastern State wise Gross Access Ratio (GAR)* 2021-22 (As on 15-12-2021) 
SN State Primary  
Upper 
Primary  
Secondary Higher Secondary  
1 ARUNACHAL PRADESH 82.76 73.30 50.41 44.34 
2 ASSAM 99.60 99.72 97.18 91.37 
3 MANIPUR 85.99 43.40 76.72 84.65 
4 MEGHALAYA                     91.92 87.23 89.63 62.76 
5 MIZORAM                       97.99 95.39 84.85 50.19 
6 NAGALAND 87.12 70.91 86.96 49.31 
7 SIKKIM  98.54 98.54 98.86 97.95 
8 TRIPURA 92.54 92.68 94.33 94.69 
North Eastern Region 96.77 93.86 86.90 76.52 
*Source: State Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWP&B 2021-22) for Primary and Upper Primary 
level habitations have been considered for calculation and Secondary and Higher Secondary level 

4 
 
villages have been considered for calculation based on GIS mapping including Government, 
Government aided and private schools. 
The Department in their written reply also apprised the Committee of the fact that under 
erstwhile Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) till 2017 - 18 and Samagra Shiksha effective from 2018 -
19, in North Eastern Regio n, sanction has been given for 17953 new/upgraded elementary 
schools, 768 new/upgraded secondary schools,65 new/upgraded Higher Secondary Schools, and 
addition of subjects in 26 Higher Secondary schools,  out of which North Eastern States have 
reported the opening of 17740 Elementary Schools,706 Secondary Schools, 17 Higher Secondary 
Schools and  addition of subjects in 21 Higher Secondary Schools respectively, till 15.03.2022. 
The details of the north eastern state wise schools approved and functional under Samagra Shiksha 
is as under: 
Status of New/Upgraded Schools in North Eastern States (As on 15-03-2022) 
                        
Sl.No State Primary  Primary to 
Upper 
Primary 
Secondary Secondary 
to Higher 
Secondary 
Additional 
Subject/Stream 
in Higher 
Secondary   
App* Fun** App Fun App Fun App Fun App Fun 
1 
ARUNACHAL 
 PRADESH 
1668 1666 713 713 84 80 1 0 0 0 
2 ASSAM 5048 5040 49 23 12 6 9 0 0 0 
3 MANIPUR 848 791 388 381 190 185 11 0 0 0 
4 
MEGHALAYA        
             
2907 2907 2263 2259 81 81 6 0 0 0 
5 
MIZORAM              
         
262 260 346 346 99 95 20 14 8 5 
6 NAGALAND 450 393 585 553 164 150 7 0 0 0 
7 SIKKIM  63 63 98 98 21 18 9 2 0 0 
8 TRIPURA 1239 1225 1026 1022 117 91 2 1 18 16 
  TOTAL  12485 12345 5468 5395 768 706 65 17 26 21 
 * App (Approved) 
** Fun (Functional) 

5 
 
Further, to ensure adequate schools in every village, the Geographic coordinates of all 
schools along with the school information are also uploaded on the school GIS Web enabled 
platform Schools Geo Portal (schoolgis.nic.in) linked with UDISE data and available for further 
analysis for the state. 
 
 The Department further informed that Samagra Shiksha also provides financial assistance 
to states and UTs for opening and running of Subhash Chandra Bose Awasiya Vidyalay as in hilly 
terrain, small and sparsely populated areas for children who are in need of shelter and care, in 
addition to the provision of regular schools. The objective is to ensure universal enrolment an d 
provide schooling facilities in areas which are sparsely populated (mostly tribal areas) where 
opening of schools may not be viable. For Netaji Subhash  Chandra Bose Avasiya Vidyalaya,  
preference is given to Educationa lly Backward Blocks (EBBs), LWE , Spec ial Focus Districts 
(SFDs) and the 115 aspirational districts identified by Niti A ayog and Special Education Zones 
(SEZs). Cumulative Status of Residential Schools/ Hostels Sanctioned and Opened in the North -
Eastern States (NER) till date-Elementary Level and Secondary Level is given below:  
Elementary level 
 
S. No. State 
Sanctioned till 2021-22 Operational till date 
Residential 
School 
Capacity Hostel Capacity Residential 
School 
Hostel 
1 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
155 15500 54 3300 154 54 
2 Assam 13 1300 1 100 3 1 
3 Manipur 9 900 8 800 9 8 
4 Mizoram 0 0 13 850 0 11 
5 Nagaland 0 0 11 550 0 11 
6 Sikkim 0 0 1 100 0 1 
7 Tripura 0 0 17 850 0 16 
Total 177 17700 105 6550 166 102 
 
Source: Appraisal Report, Minutes, AWP&Bs-2020-21 and AWP&B 2021-22 
 

6 
 
 
Secondary Level 
 S. No. State 
Sanctioned till 2021-22 Operational till date 
Residential School Capacity Hostel Capacity Residential School Hostel 
1 Manipur 9 900 0 0 9 0 
Total: 9 900 0 0 9 0 
Source: Appraisal Report, Minutes, AWP&Bs-2020-21 and AWP&B 2021-22  
Note:  Approvals as mentioned above are purely based on state/UTs proposals as per need. 
Further gaps may be identified by the states/UTs as per their respective needs/requirements and 
as per the guideline. 
Recommendation 
2.  The Committee recommends that the Department should impress upon the Ministry of 
Finance to allocate more funds for the education of SC/ST/Girl/PWDs/Transgender children to 
ensure that the schemes being operated for their upliftment and welfare do not have to face 
resource crunch. The Committee also recommends that the Department should conduct a survey 
to identify the districts where the dropout rates of SC, ST and Girl children are higher than the 
national average. Based upon the findings, an intervention plan should be chalked out no t only to 
bring back these dropout children to school but also to provide them vocational education to 
ensure enhancement in their livelihood abilities, their greater employability and financial 
independence as well as stability.            (Para: 3.1.12) 
Action Taken 
The Department in its written reply informed the Committee that Samagra Shiksha is an 
overarching programme for the school education sector extending from pre -school to class 12 and 
has been prepared with the broader goal of improving school e ffectiveness measured in terms of 
equal opportunities for schooling and equitable learning outcomes , including for 
SC/ST/Girl/PWDs/Transgender children. Under the Samagra Shiksha scheme, Annual Work Plan 
and Budget (AWP&B) Proposals are prepared by each State/UT based on their requirements and 
priority. During the appraisal of AWP&B proposals, all States and UTs are requested to conduct 
household survey an nually for the purpose of identification of Out of School Children (OoSC). 
This includes dropout children and never enrolled. The identified OoSC are brought back to 
school and assessed for their learning gaps. In order to provide universal access of educa tion to all 

7 
 
the children, financial assistance is provided to all States and UTs under Management Monitoring 
Media Evaluation and Research (MMMER) component of the scheme of Samagra Shiksha. 
 
It was also informed that special training for age appropriate a dmission of out of school 
children and residential as well as non -residential training for older children, seasonal hostels / 
residential camps, special training centres at worksites, transport/ escort facility are also supported 
to bring out of school chi ldren to the formal schooling system. Under the student oriented 
component for the children with special needs, financial assistance is provided for identification 
and assessment of children with special needs, aids and appliances, braille kits and books, 
appropriate teaching learning material and stipend to girl students with disability, etc. 
 
The Committee was apprised of the fact that the Department has also developed an online 
module for compiling the data of OoSC identified by each State/UT and their m apping with 
Special Training Centres (STC) on the PRABANDH Portal (http://samagrashiksha.in). The 
concerned State/UT validates the child wise information of the identified OoSC and STC 
uploaded by the concerned Block Resource Centre of the State for monito ring the progress of 
mainstreaming of OoSC. For the first time in 2021 -22, financial assistance upto Rs. 2000 per 
annum has been envisioned for supporting Out of School Children of age group of 16 -19 years, 
belonging to socio economically disadvantaged gro ups, for completing their education through 
NIOS/SIOS, for accessing course materials and certification.  
 
The Department of School Education and Literacy is implementing the scheme of 
Vocationalisation of School Education under the umbrella of ‘Samagra Sh iksha’. The scheme 
aims at integrating Vocational Education with general academic education in all Secondary/Senior 
Secondary schools; enhancing the employability and entrepreneurial abilities of the students, 
providing exposure to work environment; and ge nerating awareness amongst students about 
various career options so as to enable them to make a choice in accordance with their aptitude, 
competence and aspirations. The implementation of Vocational Education has expanded almost 15 
fold in the last eight years, from only 960 schools across 13 states /UTs in 2014 -15 to 14435 
schools across 36 states/UTs in 2021 -22. Currently more than 15 lakh students are undergoing 
Vocational Education under Samagra  Shiksha. Vocational Education has been introduced in 6316 
upper-primary schools all over the country  .The provision for Hub and Spoke Model h as been 
introduced, under which  the infrastructure available in the Hub schools will be utilised by the 

8 
 
students of nearby schools (spoke schools) for vocational training.  ITIs, Polytechnics etc. may 
also be used as hubs.  Under the  Hub & Spoke  model initiated from the year 2021, 139 Hub 
schools and 241 Spoke schools have been approved for the year 2021-22.  
It has been informed that Table 5.13 of the UDISE + 2020 -21 report gives Dropout Rate 
by level of education and gender and can be seen at 
https://udiseplus.gov.in/assets/img/dcf2021/UDISE+2020_21_Booklet_English.pdf  
The Ministr y of Health and Family Welfare has released The National Family Health 
Survey (NFHS - 5, 2019–21) in March 2020 https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR375/FR375.pdf.  
Apart from estimates on Health  and Nutrition at the National and State levels, NFHS -5 provides 
information on number of indicators covered in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 
which India is committed to.  Chapter-2 of NFHS-5 inter-alia deals with Educational Attainment, 
Preschool Attendance and School Attendance.Chapter -3 of NFHS -5 inter -alia deals with 
Schooling and Literacy.  State -wise fact -sheets are uploaded at 
http://rchiips.org/nfhs/factsheet_NFHS-5.shtml . NFHS-5 survey data is being analysed in the 
Department to further fine -tune the policy interventions of the Department designed for out of 
school children, including SC, ST and Girl Chi ld.  Based on the analysis , necessary technical 
assistance will also be provided to concerned States/UTs for onboarding out of school children. 
Recommendation 
3. The Committee recommends that an evaluation study to record the progress and funding 
pattern o f all the Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs) should be carried out and a 
detailed Report in this regard be prepared assessing all the bottlenecks and financial crunches 
being faced by them so that the Department is able to chalk out ways to improve the quality of 
education in KGBVs. The Committee appreciates the efforts/initiatives taken for the girl child 
education and recommends that the Department should take up the construction of the 
stalled/nonoperational KGBVs (667 out of 5615 KGBVs sanctioned) and make them operational 
on a mission mode along with integrated skill development training to these girls to achieve the 
objectives of the flagship programme of Beti Bachao Beti Padhao scheme of the government, with 
special focus on the Aspir ational Districts where operation ability is at 70% which should be 
increased to 100%. Besides this, efforts be made to open KGBVs in Meghalaya and Mizoram in 
future plans of the Department.          (Para: 3.1.17)  
 

9 
 
Action Taken 
 In compliance of Committee’s recommendation, the Department of School Education & 
Literacy, Ministry of Education in their Action Taken Notes informed the Committee that the 
Department is taking necessary steps for evaluation of KGBVs. The matter of non -
operationalization of KGBVs is regularly being taken up with respective States/UTs in the Project 
Approval Board ( PAB) meetings and also in quarterly and half yearly review meetings of 
Samagra Shiksha. In this regard, the Department has requested the States/UTs to operationalize all 
KGBVs vide letters dated 12.09.2019, 07.11.2019, 02.11.2020, 25.08.2021 and 20.01.2022.  As 
on February, 2022, a total of 5627 KGBVs have been sanctioned across the country, of which 
5018 KGBVs are functional. 
 
 It was also informed that under Sama gra Shiksha, provision has been made to 
upgrade/converge the existing KGBVs up to Senior Secondary Level. Hence, the matter of up -
gradation of KGBVs is regularly taken up with all States and UTs. All States and UTs have been 
asked to propose for up -gradation of all KGBVs (Type -I & II) in the next three years and ensure 
their proper and timely operationalization and optimum utilization of capacity. Additionally, all 
States and UTs have been requested to introduce Vocational Education in Secondary and Senior 
Secondary classes in KGBVs and also to formulate proposals for implementation of Vocational 
Education in KGBVs.  
 KGBVs are sanctioned in the Educationally Backward Blocks (EBBs) of the country. 
There are 09 EBBs in Meghalaya and Mizoram state has one EBBs  and all the EBBs of 
Meghalaya and Mizoram states are covered with KGBVs. Presently, 19 KGBVs have been 
sanctioned in Meghalaya and 02 KGBVs have sanctioned in Mizoram.  
 NCERT has taken up various activities in the form of research, development and training 
related to the functioning of Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya (KGBVs). In respect of r esearch 
related to KGBVs, the Committee has been informed as follows: 
 Study of Mahila Samakhya, SSA and NGO run Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya (KGBVs) 
of Uttar Pradesh in terms of the Objective of KGBV Scheme (2008-10) 
 Study on Implementation of Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya (KGBVs) Scheme in Muslim 
concentrated Districts of Four States (2011-13) 
 Strategies Adopted for Enrolling Girls in Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas Managed by 
Different Agencies in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and Gujarat: An Exploratory Study (2013-14) 

10 
 
 
 Study of Girl's Hostel Scheme (KGBV Type IV): An Exploratory St udy Focusing on 
Scheduled Caste Girls (SC) at Secondary Stage (2018-21) 
 Development of Bridge Course and Teacher Training Package: In 2008, NCERT organized a 
National Consultation on Kasturba Gandhi BalikaVidyalaya, KGBV. As a follow up , the 
NCERT develope d a customized teacher training package of KGBV teachers and bridge 
course for KGBV girls for concept clarification and better understanding of subjects at the 
elementary stage Bridge courses were prepared for Hindi, English, Mathematics and Science 
and History. Teacher Training Packages were prepared for Hindi, English, Mathematics and 
Science and History.  The material has been widely disseminated across all  states where the 
scheme has even translated and contextualized the bridge courses as per their stat e needs. 
NCERT has also helped the state of Haryana to develop their own bridge courses. 
 Training of KGBV teachers: NCERT has organized six training programmes from 2010 to 
2016 for KGBV teachers. Teachers from 14 states have been trained on the effective 
utilization of the bridge courses and teacher training packages prepared in different content 
areas. The training programme also helped in addressing gender inequalities and academic 
challenges faced by the teachers. 
  
Recommendation 
4. A Study Group be appointed to review the existing State of Education for Children with 
learning disabilities such as dyslexia, slow learning, autism etc. This study should serve as basis 
for a Policy on this issue.            (Para: 3.1.19) 
Action Taken 
The Department in its written reply informed the Committee that NCERT has been 
requested to form a study group to review the existing state of education for Children with 
learning disabilities such as dyslexia, slow learning, autism etc. and address the issu e of 
identification of SLDs and early interventions across the school system. The study group may 
comprise of representatives from DePWD, RCI, NCTE, NIOS, CBSE and other stakeholders as 
deemed fit. The study would further serve as a basis for a policy on the issue. 
NCERT has initiated following action in the matter: - 
 A study titled “Learning Outcomes of Children with Disabilities: Exploring the Determinants 
in Inclusive Classroom” was conducted during 2020 -21by Regional Institute of Education, 

11 
 
Ajmer with o bjectives to find out the teaching learning determinants of children with 
disabilities in Inclusive setting and t o explore the existing pedagogical processes and 
classroom climate leading to learning outcome in Inclusive setting at primary level 
(Annexure-I). 
 Another study titled “A study of Children with Learning Difficulties and Support Systems 
available in the Elementary Schools of Nagaland” was conducted in Northeast Regional 
Institute of Education, Umiam during 2018 -19 with objectives to ident ify the children with 
learning difficulties in the elementary schools of Nagaland, to study the enabling factors 
available for children with Learning Difficulties and to study the support systems available for 
children with learning difficulties. Brief report is enclosed at Annexure-II 
 Another review of studies titled “Research in Education of Children with Disabilities” was 
conducted in Regional Institute of Education, Bhubneshwar. The softcopy of the paper is 
available on NCERT website. The review present s a systematic and comprehensive 
framework concerning the state of research in the field of education of children with 
disability/disabilities (CwD/CwDs) from the year 2000 to 2017, with a view to identify the key 
areas and generate questions for future re search. Published studies, doctoral dissertations and 
institutional research were considered for mapping the current status. The analysis indicates 
that the area of study is expanding reflecting tremendous growth, research percolating various 
aspects of disability with a focus on empowering them through education. The time following 
the global flagship of Education for All (EFA) with a rights based approach for disability has 
made significant contribution to expansion of research ideas and scope. However, t he analysis 
also shows that the research still seems to be considering disability as a deficit, and the need 
for shifting the focus to capacity approach by magnifying personal capabilities and dignity of 
CwD was felt.  
 NCERT has developed A Teacher’s Handb ook titled ‘Including Children with Autism in 
Primary Classrooms’ which has been published in the year 2019. The handbook was 
developed with the objective to tackle existing issues and spread awareness about autism 
among regular schools teachers, parents and other stakeholders in education. 
NATIONAL EDUCATION POLICY (NEP), 2020 
Recommendation 
5. The Committee notes that a comprehensive implementation plan SARTHAQ (Students’ and 
Teachers’ Holistic Advancement through Quality Education) in respect of each recommendation 

12 
 
of the National Education Policy (NEP), 2020 has been developed. The Committee a lso notes that 
in the year 2021 which was the first year after the Plan, most of the stakeholders have tried to 
understand the spirit of the policy and made their own implementation plans in the policy’s 
intended spirit. Keeping in view the initiatives pla nned under NEP and the targets set for them, 
the Committee recommends that a Programme of Action (PoA) be prepared for NEP 2020 with 
definite time-frame with strict deadlines for achievement of different tasks and goals to provide a 
clear roadmap of the im plementation schedule. Committee taking note of the vision of the NEP, 
2020 aimed at bringing transformative changes in the field of education in the country, 
emphasises that proper budgetary allocation be made to ensure successful and effective 
implementation of the Plan.            (Para: 3.3.5) 
Action Taken 
The Department while replying to the Committee's recommendation informed that 
implementation of NEP 2020 requires multiple initiatives and actions, which are to be taken up in 
a synchronized and systematic manner, by multiple bodies including the Ministry of Education, 
CABE, State/UT Governments, education -related Ministries, State Departments of Education, 
Boards, NTA, the regulatory bodies of school and higher education, NCERT, SCERTs, schools 
and HEIs.  Education is in the Concurrent List of the Constitu tion and major responsibility of 
implementation of NEP following prescribed norms and standards falls under the domain of the 
States and UT Governments. 
 
It was further informed that the Department of School Education and Literacy has 
developed an indicati ve and suggestive Implementation Plan for School Education, called 
‘Students’ and Teachers’ Holistic Advancement through Quality Education (SARTHAQ)’ for the 
next 10 years. SARTHAQ has been developed through wide and intensive consultative process 
with Sta tes and UTs, Autonomous bodies and suggestions received from all stakeholders. The 
major focus of SARTHAQ is to define activities in such a manner which clearly delineate goals, 
outcomes and timeframe. The Department has completely aligned existing schemes  i.e, Samagra 
Shiksha and PM Poshan Shakti NirmanYojna with the recommendation s of NEP 2020. Budgetary 
support to the States/UTs is made under these schemes to implement the recommendations of 
NEP 2020. The progress made by the States and UT Governments fo r implementing various 
initiatives under NEP 2020 are monitored through Review meetings and advisories from time to 
time. 

13 
 
Further, As per the perspectives of the NEP 2020, four National Curriculum Frameworks - 
i.e., the National Curriculum Framework for Sch ool Education, National Curriculum for Early 
Childhood Care and Education, National Curriculum Framework for Teacher Education and 
National Curriculum Framework for Adult Education are being developed. A National Steering 
Committee for the development o f National Curriculum Framework  has been formed under the 
chairmanship of Dr. K Kasturirangan on 21-9-2021. The Committee is being assisted by NCERT. 
Widespread national consultations with multiple stakeholders are taking place for the development 
of the National Curriculum Framework including: 
 Teachers, school principals, anganwadi teachers, teacher educators, parents, community 
members, students, non-literates, neo literates, and education experts 
 District-level consultations in every district of the country 
 More than 700 State -level  Expert Groups in States and Union Territories across subjects and 
cross cutting themes  
 25 National-level expert groups including international experts 
 The inputs gathered are being analyzed rigorously 
A robust and comprehensive  mechanism using technology including machine learning has been 
adopted to collect and collate inputs from all stakeholders to make the entire process near -
paperless. 
The Department has also released a mandate document which serves as a guideline for 
development of NCF. The mandate document has been uploaded at 
https://ncert.nic.in/pdf/Mandate-NCF.pdf. 
 
STRENGTHENING TEACHING -LEARNING AND RESULTS FOR STATES (STARS) 
PROJECT 
Recommendation 
6. The Committee notes the objectives of this new STARS Project and hopes that the 
partnership between India and the World Bank for strengthening public school education will be 
able to support the country’s goal of providing ‘education for all’.  The Committee observes that 
STARS Project will be able to launch new initiat ives and introduce desired reforms to address the 
‘learning outcome’ challenge and will help students in their future. The Committee recommends 
that State -wise progress made under the Project be continuously evaluated by setting up a 
coordinating mechanism of all stakeholders.           (Para: 3.5.4) 

14 
 
Action Taken 
The Committee was informed that the State -wise progress as per DLIs and SIG manual of 
STARS Project is being verified by Independent Verification Agency. 'Project Management Unit 
(PMU)' is being se t up under the STARS Project for monitoring and coordination among all 
stakeholders for reviewing progress of the States/UTs. 
 
NATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT SURVEY (NAS) 
Recommendation 
7. The Committee is happy to note the enthusiastic participation of schools and students in 
the National Achievement Survey which will be crucial for forming learning outcome strategies 
for the post -pandemic era. The Committee observes that results of National Achievement Survey 
(NAS) will not only be useful for tracking education tre nds but it will also help the policy makers 
in understanding the learning loss or lags. The Committee recommends that, after collation of 
results, a follow up action plan to address the areas of concern be formulated so that requisite 
action in those areas can be taken.             (Para: 3.6.3)
  
Action Taken 
The Department in their Action Taken Replies informed the Committee that NAS 2021 
was held on 12.11.2021 and has covered (a) Government Schools (Central Government and State 
Government); (b) Government Aided Schools; and (c) Private Unaided Schools. Subjects covered 
are Language, Mathematics & E nvironmental Studies  (EVS) for class 3 & 5; Language, 
Mathematics, Science & Social Science for class 8 and Language, Mathematics, Science, Social 
Science and English for class 10.  About 34 lakh students of 1.18 lakh schools from both rural and 
urban areas, have appeared in NAS 2021 which was held on 12th November, 2021.  
 
The Department also stated that the objective of NAS 2021 is to evaluate children's progres s 
and learning competencies as an indicator of the health of the education system, so as to take 
appropriate steps for remedial actions at different levels. 720 District Report Cards, 36 State 
Learning Reports and 1 National Report are being prepared by NCERT for NAS 2021. The Report 
Card will consist of Overall learning level at district level; Disaggregated learning level by gender, 

15 
 
location and social group; Detailed performance in each of the learning outcomes; The learning 
outcomes where children requi re more support; Distribution of Student in the different 
performance level (below basic, basic , proficient and advanced) and  Sample 
coverage(disaggregated sample size within a district by gender, location, school management, 
etc;).NAS 2021 results will also provide a snapshot of the learning during COVID pandemic.  The 
Department has further informed that based on findings of NAS 2021, the Department will: 
➢Initiate curricular reform  
➢Setting and monitoring learning targets  
➢ Modifying classroom practices and teacher training  
➢ Inform ways to improve connections between home and school to support student 
learning  
➢Prepare policy briefs to inform stakehol ders and practitioners in areas  such as 
curriculum development, textbook development, and teacher training  
➢Produce thematic reports (implications for teachers, curriculum and textbooks, 
classroom practices and teacher training, student misconception report, report on equity 
in learning) based on NAS 2021 data  
➢Organize co-interpretational workshops, dissemination workshops, support state/ UT 
governments in developing long term, mid -term and short -term interventions for 
improving learning levels, use of NAS 2021 data for further research activities 
Recommendation 
8. The Committee recommends that the Department should undertake a structured study to 
understand the need as to how long and in which States or Districts, Adult Education programmes 
are still required to be continued. Budgetar y provisions for Adult Education be made later on 
strictly on the basis of such need assessment study.            (Para: 3.7.1) 
Action Taken 
The Committee was apprised of the fact that under the New India Literacy Programme 
(NILP) scheme, three types of assessment are to be initiated and undertaken, namely, on Annual 
Basis, Mid-term and Post-implementation Assessment/ Evaluation of the scheme in the country by 
sampling data from various State/UTs. 

16 
 
 
(i) Annual Basis:  Annual Achievement Survey of NILP from 500-1000 randomly selected 
learners from each state/UT (depending on number of non -literates) will be conducted every year. 
The expertise of NCERT would be used for conducting the Annual Achievement Survey. Later 
on, Performance Assessment, Review, and Ana lysis of Knowledge for Holistic Development 
(PARAKH), a National Assessment Center will be authorized to conduct the same when it is 
established. 
 
(ii) Mid-term Assessment: A third party assessment is to be undertaken which will be conducted 
by an agency selected by the department by adopting all norms and parameters of Government of 
India. On completion of the assessment, the agency will present its study report to the Secretary, 
Department of School Education & Literacy, Ministry of Education. The same wi ll be sent to the 
NITI Aayog and Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for information. 
 
(iii) Post-term implementation Assessment/ Evaluation: A third party Assessment/ Evaluation 
will be conducted by a designated agency as selected by the depart ment which will adopt all 
norms and parameters of Government of India. The agency will present its study report to the 
Secretary, Department of School Education & Literacy, Ministry of Education. The same will be 
sent to the NITI Aayog and Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for information. 
 
With the above mandated assessment studies to be undertaken on the implementation of the 
scheme for Adult Education, the findings, observations and recommendations on the scope, 
planning, implementation and monitoring components have to be reckoned to enable  the 
Department for taking suitable future course of action for adult education scheme.  A structured 
need analysis study for continuation of adult education in districts and states would be taken up by 
NCERT in the year 2022-23.  
Recommendation  
9. The Committee observes that as per Census 2011, the absolute number of non -literates of 
the country in 15 years and above age group is 25.76 crore (Male 9.08 crore, Female 16.68 
crore) and despite many steps being taken in this regard it is estimated that currently around 
18.12 crore adults are still non -literate in India. The Committee welcomes the initiatives being 
taken to further literacy in the country through Schemes such as National Literacy Programme 

17 
 
and recommends that the success of such programme s will require sustained efforts and close 
monitoring for which the Ministry must put in place requisite mechanisms. The Committee may 
also be informed of the monitoring mechanism so evolved.          (Para: 3.7.2) 
 
Action Taken 
The Department while keeping in view the recommendations of NEP, 2020 and UNESCO 
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 4.6, informed the Committee that a centrally sponsored 
scheme “New India Literacy Programme” (NILP) has been approved by the Government of India 
with financial outlay of Rs.1037.90 crore ( central share: Rs.700.00crore and state share: 
Rs.337.90crore) for 2022 -23 to 2026 -27.The scheme has five components: (i) Foundational 
Literacy and Numeracy, (ii) Criti cal Life Skills, (iii) Vocational Skills Development, (iv) Basic 
Education and (v) Continuing Education. 
 
The NILP provides for (i) Involvement of school students, pre -service students of Higher 
Education Institutions (HEIs), school teachers, Aganwadi and ASHA workers, NYKS, NSS, NCC 
volunteers, (ii) School to be unit for implementation of the scheme (iii) The age cohorts of 15 -35 
will be saturated first, followed by ages 35 and above, priority will be given to girls and women, 
SC/ST/OBC/Minorities, Persons with Special Needs/Divyangjans (Disabled persons), 
marginalized/nomadics/ construction workers/labourers, etc.  (iv) use of ICT and o nline 
implementation of the scheme through ‘Online Teaching Learning and Assessment System’ 
(OTLAS) (v) m aterial and resources through digital modes, viz, TV, radio, cell phone -based 
free/open-source Apps/portals, etc. (vi) Assessment tests to be conducted  in schools; Assessment 
on demand through OTLAS and generation of e -certificates, (vii) Sample achievement survey: 
Sample achievement survey will be held every year for 500 -1000 randomly selected learners from 
each State/UT.(viii) Online Management Information System (MIS): Online MIS will be in place 
to track the progress. Monitoring of progress shall be undertaken at national, state, district and 
school levels through online mode. 
 
It was further informed that a Cell for National Centre for Literacy (CNCL ), with an objective 
to promote Adult Education & Life -long Learning has been constituted in NCERT, New Delhi on 
17 August, 2021. CNCL will work on the components of foundational literacy and numeracy. 
Further, the CNCL is mandated to develop a national cu rriculum Framework for Adult Education 

18 
 
that should very clearly define learning outcomes for 21" century citizen not only for India but for 
all Indians to be global citizens.New teaching learning materials for literacy training ha ve been 
developed, reviewe d, finalized and relevant audio, video materials are prepared. All such 
materials are uploaded on DIKSHA vertical (https://dikshagov.in). These materials include: - 
 
 Primers are considered as a basic teaching learning material for adult learners. Four volumes 
of the Primers are developed and reviewed & in the process of finalization for further 
dissemination. 
 Worksheets and assessment sheets on Foundational Literacy and Numeracy are prepared and 
uploaded on DIKSHA portal (vertical for Adult Education). 
 To facilitate self-learning practice amongst learners, online modules (video programmes)  for 
adult learners are being developed and final video programmes have been uploaded on 
DIKSHA portal. 
 To train volunteers and teachers of adult literacy programmes, training modules for instructors 
have been developed and under the process of review. Final version of these training modules 
will be uploaded on DIKSHA portal. 
 Learning outcomes for foundational literacy and numeracy have been developed and under the 
process of review.  
 Ample promotional materials related to adult education and focusing on the five programs of 
NEP 2020 are in the process of development. 
 
ORGANIZATIONS/ BODIES UNDER DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & 
LITERACY (MINSTRY OF EDUCATION) NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL 
RESEARCH AND TRAINING (NCERT) AND CENTRAL BOARD OF SECONDARY 
EDUCATION (CBSE) 
Recommendation 
10. A Study be urgently commissioned firstly to understand the impact of internet based online 
education on  school children and then to identify measures to be undertaken to mitigate the ill 
effects of unrestricted access to internet.            (Para: 4.1.8) 
Action Taken 

19 
 
The Department in its written replies highlighted that  several research Studies are proposed to be 
conducted by the NCERT in the session 2022 -23 regarding the technology integration in school 
education. The proposed titles are given below: 
 
 Effectiveness of Augmented reality based e -contents and Virtual labs on  achievement 
in Science of class IX school students. 
 An evaluative study of ICT @ School Scheme under Samagra Shiksha. 
 Effectiveness of ICT based accessible interventions ( Universal Design of Learning 
(UDL)-based e-Contents) of NCERT on holistic developmen t of students with special 
needs. 
 Effectiveness of ICT in Education Courses on ICT competency and Techno -Pedagogy 
Integration Competency of in-service Teachers at Secondary Level. 
 A study on the effectiveness of Cyber Safety & Security Awareness Package 
implemented through the cascade and direct intervention models.  
 A study of different modes of online education adopted by Elementary school teachers 
during the pandemic. 
 e-Learning initiatives in India for students at secondary stage during Covid -19 
pandemic: experience based need assessment including gender perspective. 
 Implementing ICT interventions at school stage: a block level research study. 
All these studies will try to identify the needs, effectiveness of various ICT interventions, status of 
ICT in t he present scenario, etc. including impact of internet education on school children and 
suggest measures. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2022 -23) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & LITERACY 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee taking note of the figures and facts furnished by the Department of School 
Education & Literacy from Table: 2 * and Table: 3 *, in respect of the pe rcentage variations 
between BE 2021 -22, RE 2021 -22 and BE 2022 -23 and the projections of funds made and 
allocated, observes that though there is an increase of 15.63% (in BE 2022 -23) as compared to 
BE 2021-22 and an increase of 22.09% (in BE 2022-23 as compared to RE 2021-22) compared to 
the Financial figures of FY 2021 -22, it still leaves a yawning gap of 8.18% ie. Rs 5,653.12 crores 
between the projected demand of Rs 69,102.49 crores of the Department and the actual 
allocations made by the Ministry of Fin ance. The Committee recommends that the Department 
may undertake a review/ analysis in respect of each Scheme in which there is a gap between 
Projection made and the allocation made, so that it is able to re -modify its implementation 
dynamics and should cl osely monitor their physical and financial progress so that the Scheme 
does not lag behind due to reduced allocation. Besides this, such an analysis will also help the 
Department in making their case for enhanced allocation in such Schemes at RE stage. (Para: 2.8) 
 
2. The Committee is of the firm view that the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) and the 
Central Sector Schemes (CSeS) under the Department form the backbone of the basic education in 
the country. But taking note of the figures (in Table: 3) furnished by the Department, it is evident 
that expenditure towards CSS and CSeS has not been done in a progressive manner and this has 
led to underutilization of the allocations made. The Committee notes that as on 31 st January, 
2022, only Rs 23,572.41 cr ores have been spent against an amount of Rs 40,576.50 crores in RE 
2021-22 under the CSS which is 58.1% of the final allocation. Also, only Rs 1.46 crores have been 
spent against an amount of Rs 286.20 crores in RE 2021 -22 under the CSeS, which is reflective of 
the extent to which the Department has underutilized the allocated funds. Noting that the actual 
expenditure figures are till 31.01.2022, the Committee recommends that the Department  
* Annexure III 

21 
 
undertake a procedural review to identify the fact ors which have led to such gross 
underutilization of the allocated funds, in respect of each Scheme and take corrective/remedial 
action/steps so that such underutilization is not reflected in the allocation for the Financial Year 
2022-23.                   (Para: 2.9) 
 
3. Table 4 * details the projection made by the Department, Scheme -wise. The Committee 
notes that in respect of the two flagship Schemes, namely Samagra Shiksha and PM -POSHAN, 
which account for nearly 75% of the total allocated funds, the tren d of underutilization has been 
continuing. As the effective implementation of these two Schemes will majorly impact the 
performance of the Department, the Committee recommends that strict implementation policies 
should be laid out for effectively utilizing the allotted funds.           (Para: 2.10) 
 
4. The Committee also recommends that States capable of efficient spending and utilization 
of funds and those not so efficient cannot be put on the same pedestal. Fund allocation to States 
should be made on the basis of their performance and efficient utilization.                    (Para: 2.11) 
Action Taken 
Samagra Shiksha 
 
The Department in its written action taken reply informed the Committee that monitoring of the 
financial and physical progress is done from the stage of beginning from the approval of estimate 
by Project Approval Board (PAB) and through the following ways: 
I Public Financial Management System (PFMS) 
Public Financial Management System (PFMS) has been implemented for all the Centrally 
Sponsored S chemes by the Controller General of Accounts (CGA), Ministry of Finance. 
This system provides MIS reports indicating availability of funds in bank accounts at 
various tiers/levels of programme implementation. The reports provide online balances 
lying in th e bank accounts of such agencies. Availability of this information at the 
Department (Ministry level) helps in better financial management, more accurate 
assessment of actual requirement for implementation and further release of funds. All 
States/UTs are required to be PFMS compliant for release of funds. 
* Annexure III 

22 
 
II PRABANDH portal - Project Monitoring system (PMS): 
The Online PRABANDH portal (http://samagrashiksha.in/) is designed for Monitoring the 
Physical Progress and Financial Management including expenditure on all the components 
and activities of Smagra Shiksha as well as GOI releases of Central share and the State 
share to the implementing Society. States and UTs may view the Status of GoI Releases, 
approved outlays, coverage as per UDISE, school  wise list of approvals, school wise gaps, 
cancellations in approvals etc. under S amagra Shiksha. In addition, on line submission of 
Monthly Progress Reports, physical as well as financial, can also be made by the 
respective State/UTs in the PRABANDH System . The PMS online monitoring system 
tracks the physical progress of the scheme and the flow of funds to and expenditure 
incurred by the States and UTs. 
III Audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
• The accounts of the State Implementation Society (SIS) are also subject to the 
provisions of Comptroller and Auditor General of India (Duties, Powers and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 as amended from time to time.  
• The Act also provides for a special audit / performance audit of SIS by Comptroller 
and Audit General of India which would be undertaken as necessary. 
IV Manual on Financial Management & Procurement 
The Department has developed a Manual on Financial Management & Procurement to 
streamline financ ial management under the Samagra Shiksha. The Manual contains 
detailed procedures on financial management such as accounting, fund flow arrangements, 
financial reporting, internal controls and audit, external audit, procurement procedure, etc. 
The provisions of the Manual were adopted by State Samagra Shiksha programmes. The 
implementation of the provision of the Manual is regularly reviewed in review meetings 
taken by this Department. 
V Concurrent Financial Review and Monitoring by Government of India 
• The implementing agencies at all levels are required to keep proper accounts of the 
funds received by them and the expenditure incurred from these funds. They must 
also ensure that the expenditure is incurred for the purpose for which it was 

23 
 
sanctioned and it is covered by relevant financial regulations / rules.  In order to 
ensure that the accounts are kept properly and the funds are utilized for the purpose 
for which they were sanctioned, a concurrent financial review and monitoring is 
carried out by Government of India at periodic intervals.  
• The accounts of the State Implementing Society are open to inspection by 
Government of India/State Government and the audit party deputed by them. 
• Government of India may hire the services of reputed institutions to undertake 
concurrent financial review of the scheme. 
VI Internal Audit 
• For reporting on the adequacy of internal controls, the accuracy and propriety of 
transactions, the extent to which assets are accounted for and safeguarded, and the 
level of compliance with the scheme financial norms and State Government 
procedures, provisions of internal audit has been kept. One of the responsibility of 
internal audit is to ensure that the prescribed accounting system including regular 
bank reconciliation is strictly followed by all.  
• In States where an in-house internal audit team is not available, qualified Chartered 
Accountants/Cost Accountants firm may be engaged for carrying out internal audit. 
• The internal audit of State Project Office (SPO) and District Projec t Coordinator 
Offices shall be carried out every year. Internal audit of Schools is conducted on a 
percentage basis, so as to cover 5 per cent of schools in each district.  
Statutory Audit 
• As autonomous societies under the Society Registration Act, all t he State 
Implementation Societies under Samagra Shiksha have to conduct mandatory 
statutory audit on an annual basis (to be completed within 6 months of the close of 
financial year). The statutory audit is conducted by CAG empanelled Chartered 
Accountant.  
The Department reviews the audit observations and regularly monitors compliance 
of the audit observations by the States/UTs. 

24 
 
• A detailed Terms of Reference (TOR) and a selection procedure are laid down for 
the engagement of Chartered Accountant firms by States whereby the Chartered 
Accountant firms have to be selected from the panel provided by the C&AG and 
got approved by the Executive Committee of the Samagra Shiksha society of 
respective State/UT. 
VII Review meeting with Finance Controllers of SIS 
The meet ings are held with Finance Controllers of all State s/UTs. During these meetings, stock 
taking of the financial progress of the programme, reviews of audit compliance and good financial 
management practices are done. The participants are also oriented in go od financial management 
practices carried out in States/UT’s. 
 
PM-Poshan:  Under PM POSHAN Scheme, the total allocated fund as RE for the year 2021 -22 
i.e. Rs.10233.75 crore has been utilized during the year 2021 -22. Funds are released to States and 
UTs after adjusting the unspent balance from previous year. The Dept. of Expenditure has 
introduced new procedure of release of funds to States and UTs through Public Finance 
Management System (PFMS), which has been used for release of funds. As the States wer e facing 
certain technical issue s with the new system, the pace of releases were hampered to a degree. 
However, by the end of the financial year, 100% of the allocated RE i.e. Rs 10233.75 crore has 
been released to States and UTs. PM POSHAN is a rights bas ed programme and funds under the 
scheme are released to the States based on their performance in terms of number of children and 
number of school days. 
 
SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & 
LITERACY 
SAMAGRA SHIKSHA ABHIYAN 
Recommendation 
5. The Committee notes that the Actual Expenditure on the Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan for the 
year 2020-21 was Rs 27,834.57 Crore, Rs 30,000 Crore in RE (2021 -22) and in BE (2022-23), Rs 
37,383.36Cr has been provided for it, which is an increase of almost 25% from the RE 2021 -22. 
Actual expenditure as on 31.01.2022 was Rs 16,821.70 crores. In this regard, it has been 

25 
 
submitted by the Department that this Scheme has been aligned with the recommendations of the 
National Education Policy, 2020 (NEP: 2020) and extended from 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 with a 
projected budget outlay of Rs 2.94 lakh crores.           (Para: 3.1.7) 
 
6.  In light of the substantial enhancement in allocation for the Scheme, and continuing 
underutilization of funds, as it has been noticed that  by 31 st January, 2022, merely 55% of the 
funds available at RE 2021 -22 were utilized, despite the scheme being one of the most prominent 
and a flagship schemes of the Department, the Committee recommends that a mechanism be 
evolved through which trend of underutilization could be monitored and assessed on real time 
basis and corrective action can be taken. Also, as the effective implementation of the Scheme lies 
in its successful implementation by States, a coordination mechanism between the senior officia ls 
handling education Departments at the Centre and officials of the States needs to be established 
so that any bottlenecks can be expeditiously managed and resolved.       (Para: 3.1.8) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry in its Action Taken Notes has informed the Committee that the National 
Education Policy (NEP) 2020 aims to address the many growing developmental imperatives of 
our country. This Policy proposes the revision and revamping of all aspects of the education 
structure, including its regulation and gover nance, to create a new system that is aligned with the 
aspirational goals of 21 st century education, including SDG -4, while building upon India’s 
traditions and value systems. It was also informed that Samagra Shiksha is an integrated scheme 
on school education which envisages the 'school' as a continuum from pre -school, primary, upper 
primary, secondary to Senior Secondary levels. The Scheme is in accordance with Sustainable 
Development Goal for Education (SDG -4) and has also been aligned with the National  Education 
Policy (NEP) 2020 that is to ensure inclusive and equitable, quality and holisti c school education. 
The scheme initially approved from 2018-19 to 2020-21, has now been revised and extended upto 
2025-26, aligning it to the vision of National Educ ation Policy 2020. Budget Estimate (BE) 2021 -
22 in respect of SAMAGRA SHIKSHA is Rs. 31050.15 crore. The proposed BE for 2022 -23 is 
Rs. 37383.36 crore.  
 
 

26 
 
Action Taken 
The Committee has been informed by the Department that the budget proposals under 
Samagra Shiksha are prepared by the States/UTs in the form of Annual Work Plan & Budget 
(AWP&B), covering all the interventions specified in the Scheme norms. Every year, all 
States/UTs prepare their budget proposals for funds required for on -going and new inter ventions 
of Samagra Shiksha in the AWP&B. The budget allocation of States/UTs under the scheme is 
considered by the Project Approval Board  (PAB) in consultation with the State/UT. The PAB 
takes into consideration previous physical and financial progress an d unspent balances while 
approving the AWP&B and sanctioning new proposals. Subsequent releases are also subject to 
physical and financial progress and savings under the scheme. Thus, there is a linkage between 
performance of States and their budget alloca tion. In addition, Department of Expenditure vide its 
OM No. 1(13)PFMS/FCD/2020 dated 23.03.2021 and 23.03.2022, has conveyed  the modified 
procedure for release of funds to States/UTs for the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) and 
monitoring utilization of  the funds released. The aim of the revised procedure is to ensure 
effective cash management and improve transparency in public expenditure management. The 
revised procedure is already under effect since 1st July, 2021. 
Recommendation 
7. Cleanliness and hygiene in schools are important issues. Structured initiatives and district 
level drives such as ‘Swaccha Vidyalaya Parisar for Azadi  from Litter and Garbage’, with 
enough scope for community participation should be undertaken as a part of ‘Azadi ka Amri t 
Mahotsav’ at school level.            (Para: 3.1.20) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry in its Action Taken Notes informed the Committee that the Department of 
School Education & Literacy, in coordination with State Governments and UT Administrations, 
have been observing Swachhata Pakhwada  from the year 2016 from 1 st -15th September. The 
schools and students across all States and UTs have been participating whole -heartedly in the 
Swachhata Pakhwada every year. A short note on initiatives under this campaign , which has been 
shared, is below: 
 

27 
 
 Swachhata Pakhwada, 2018:  During the S wachhata Pakhwada observed in September 
2018 all schools including private schools, State Governments  and UT Administrations 
undertook cleanliness drives in schools through various activities such as hand washing, 
role-plays etc. A list of suggested daily activities was shared with States and UTs. The 
Pakhwada focused on sanitation and hygiene in schools. The last day of Swachhata 
Pakhwada i.e. 15 th September, 2018 was converged with the launch of the “Swachhata Hi 
Seva (SHS)” campaign which went on till 2 nd October, 2018, throughout the country. 
Swachhata Captain and Swachhata Monitor for each school were appointed to encourage 
students to work for Swachhata on a sustainable basis. 11.82 crore students took 
“Swachhata Shapath” on 1 st September, 2018. 11.61  lakh sc hools participated on 
SWACHH WATER DAY on 12th September, 2018. 
 
o Swachhata Hi Seva Day: 15 th September 2018:   The Hon’ble Prime Minister 
requested all citizens to participate in the Swachhata movement in the run -up to the 
3rd anniversary of Swachh  Bharat Mission under a nationwide sanitation 
campaign, “Swachhata Hi Seva (SHS)”. As a precursor to the launch of the 150th 
birth year celebrations of Mahatma Gandhi, the Swachhata Hi Seva 2018 was run 
from 15th September to 2nd October 2018, the last day  of Swachhata Pakhwada of 
this Department coincided with the launch of SHS 2018 campaign on 15th 
September 2018. Children in schools in all States and UTs participated in the SHS 
2018 by undertaking Shramdaan activities and postcard writing addressed to th e 
Prime Minister of India describing their contribution towards Swachhata and 
making commitments for future contribution.  
 
o During the Swachhata Hi Seva Day, a total of 6,22,27,373 students participated in 
shramdaan activities from 9,06,883 schools. 201308 96 students wrote postcards to 
Hon’ble Prime Minister of India, and 141 numbers of Postcards were shortlisted by 
the State and UTs for the national level. Out of these, 3 students were awarded by 
Hon’ble Prime Minister of India, at a function held on 2nd October 2018 
 Swachhata Pakhwada, 2019: For Swachhta Pakhwada 2019, this Department requested 
all the States/ UTs to observe Swachhta Pakhwada, 2019 during September 1st to 15th, 
2019.The day-wise action plan for Swachhata Pakhwada have also been suggested to the 
States/UTs for observing Swachhata Pakhwada, 2019. 

28 
 
o Swachhata Hi Seva Day : 11 th September, 2019:      On the request of the nodal 
department of Swachhta Pakhwada, Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, 
Ministry of Jal Shakti, this Department observed in association with States and UTs 
Swachhta Hi Seva, 2019 from 11th September to 2nd October 2019. 
o States/UTs have were requested to include "Avoidance of single -use plastic both 
inside and outside the school premises" in the activities of SwachhtaPakhwada, 
2019 and to organize an “Ess ay competition” on Plastic Waste Free India for 
students of classes IX to XII on 7 th September 2019 and to furnish Top 3 entries by 
12th September 2019. 
o States/UTs were requested to organize a competition on the theme “Letter to Bapu” 
on 13 th September 201 9. The States/UTs were requeste d to provide 3 entries in 
category class 3 to 5; and 3 entries in category class 6 to 12, to this Department. 
3,54,67,127 students of 6,65,818 schools participated in Letter Writing 
Competition “Letter to Bapu”. Out of entrie s received from States/UTs through 
Google Drive, top 6 entries in two categories (Category 1: Class III to V and 
Category 2: Class VI to XIII) were finalized for the national level. Six selected 
students were awarded by Hon’ble Prime Minister of India, at a function held on 
2nd October, 2019. 
o During the Swachhata Hi Seva Day on 11 th September 2019, a total of 7,83,54,218 
students participated in shramdaan activities from 12,35,635 schools. 
 
 Swachh Bharat Diwas (Shramdaan: Plastic Waste Collection): 2nd October, 2019:     
Swachh Bharat Diwas (Shramdaan: Plastic Waste Collection) was organized on 2 nd 
October 2019 and 6,70,33,153  students of 7,73,050 schools particip ated in Shramdaan for 
Plastic Waste Collection on 2nd October 2019. 
 
 Gandagi Mukt Bharat (G MB):    GMB campaign – a special week long campaign for 
swachhata from 8-15 August 2020 launched on the occasion of inauguration of Rashtriya 
Swachhata Kendra (RKS) on 8 th August 2020 by Department of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation. On the advice of Ministr y of Jal Shakti this Department requested States and 
UTs to organise an online painting competition (classes 6 to 8) and an essay competition 
(classes 9 to 12) on the theme of "Gandagi Mukt Mera Gaon". Accordingly, painting and 
essay competition were organ ized and a total of 63,90,140 lakh students from 2,54,869 

29 
 
lakhs schools had participated in Painting and Essay competition. The winners were 
felicitated on the occasion of Swachh Bharat Diwas on 2 nd October, 2019 in a virtual 
programme. 
 
 Swachhata Pakhwada 2020:  Swachhta Pakhwada 2020, which was scheduled from 16 th 
to 30th April, 2020, was not held due to COVID 19 pandemic. 
 
 Swachhata Pakhwada 2021: For Swachhta Pakhwada 2021, this Department requested 
all the States /UTs to observe Swachhta Pakhwada, 2021 during 1 st to 15 th September, 
2021. The day -wise action plan for Swachhata Pakhwada  were was suggested to the 
States/UTs for observing Swachhata Pakhwada, 2021. As per report furnished by 
States/UTs, 3,78,15,074 students of 7,82,827 schools,  have participa ted in Swachhata   
Pakhwada, 2021. 
 
Swachh Vidyalaya Puraskar (SVP):  The Department of School Education & Literacy instituted 
Swachh Vidyalaya Puraskar (SVP)  in 2016-17 at District, State and National level as a next step 
to Swachh Vidyalaya Initiative. Th ese awards are given to ensure long term sustainability and 
behavioural change towards cleanliness in schools. Swachh Vidyalaya Puraskar is an initiative to 
recognize, inspire and celebrate excellence in water, sanitation and hygiene practices in schools. 
 
 Swachh Vidyalaya Puraskar (SVP), 2016 -17:  More than 2.68 lakh schools participated in 
SVP 2016-17. Out of 643 schools shortlisted by the States, 172 schools were selected for the 
National awards for SVP 2016 -17. 11 best performing districts with highest participation for 
the National awards were given Certificate of Recognition. 
 
 Swachh Vidyalaya Puraskar (SVP), 2017 -18: SVP 2017 -18 was extended to Government 
aided schools and private schools, in both rural and urban areas. 5.33 lakh schools submitted 
online applications for SVP 2017-18. Top 52 schools were selected for the National awards for 
SVP 2017-18. 
It has been further informed that Swachh Vidyalaya Puraskar (SVP) for the years 2018 -19, 
2019-20 and 2020-21 due to administrative reasons could not be organized. 
 
 

30 
 
 Swachh Vidyalaya Puraskar (SVP), 2021-22:  
o SVP 2021 -22 has been successfully launched by the Hon’ble MoS, Ministry of 
Education on 12 th January 2022, on the birth anniversary of Swami Vivekanand 
celebrated as National Youth Day. 
o Guidelines for SVP 2021-22 have also been modified/ finalized, in consultation with 
UNICEF. 
o In view of the COVID pandemic, an additional parameter - “COVID-19 preparedness 
and response” - has been included in the Swachh Vidyalaya package in 2021 -22, 
considering its implications for health, hygiene and safety of the children. 
o Guidelines of SVP 2021-22 have been shared with States/UTs 
o UNICEF has also developed the Web/ Mobile application for SVP 2021 -22. The last 
date for submission of application by the schools for SVP aw ards is 31 st March 2022. 
Presently, the process for registration of SVP awards is going on. 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI POSHAN SHAKTI NIRMAN (PM POSHAN) SCHEME 
Recommendation 
8. The Committee observes that in the financial year 2021 -22 (till 31.01.2022), only Rs 
6,660.54 crores have been utilized under PM -POSHAN Scheme from the allocated Rs 11,500 
crores which is around 57.91%. It is also understood that not much of the underutilization of 
funds would have been covered in the remaining two months. The Committee al so observes that in 
the year 2020 -21, even though no advertisement & publicity activities under the scheme were 
carried out due to COVID -19 Pandemic, the Department was able to spent 99.87% of the 
allocated funds. Thus, underutilization in such a Welfare S cheme and that too for students 
remains unacceptable. The Committee also takes note of the statement by the Department that 
“there has been no change in funding pattern of the scheme during the COVID -19 pandemic”. 
The Committee therefore, recommends that t here is an urgent need to put in place effective 
strategies for utilizing the funds. Also, it would be prudent on part of the Department to chalk out 
alternative mechanisms if it comes to notice that the implementation and utilization under the 
Scheme is lagging in any quarter so that course correction could be done.                  (Para: 3.2.5) 
 
 

31 
 
Action Taken 
The Committee was informed that BE for PM POSHAN Scheme for the year 2021 -22 is 
Rs 11500 crore which has been reduced to 10233.75 crore at the RE stage as per the outlay 
appraised by Expenditure Finance Committee ( EFC) and approved by Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA) . The total allocated fund as RE for the year 2021 -22 i.e. Rs.10233.75 
crore has been utilized during the year 2021-22. 
Recommendation 
9. The Committee is of the view that such a Scheme has the potential to have 
intergenerational effects on child nutrition through improving the mother’s health and education 
levels. Thus, for greater impact and fulfilment of its objectives, reforms towards improving meal 
quality, creating better infrastructure and putting in place stronger systems f or accountability and 
monitoring are a prerequisite. The Committee also notes that with the closure of Schools due to 
the pandemic, household food security has also been affected. Hence, there is a need to take a 
close look at the Scheme so that the existi ng gaps in the scheme can be plugged. There have been 
suggestions for including eggs at least twice a week, introducing a breakfast, extending the school 
meals to include children up to class 10 and enhancing the payments for cooks and helpers. The 
Committee recommends that these suggestions be examined in coordination with experts in the 
field and from the perspective of being beneficial in advancing the objectives, so that required 
action can be taken.              (Para: 3.2.7)  
Action Taken 
The Department in its written replies informed the Committee that during the COVID -19 
pandemic, since schools were closed for major part of the academic year, all enrolled children are 
given Food Security Allowance comprising of food grains and cooking cost in the for m of dry 
ration or cooking cost as Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) under NFSA, 2013 by States and UTs 
during 2020-21 and 2021-22 under PM POSHAN Scheme.  
 
It was further commented that the Department of School Education and Literacy has 
examined inclusion of the new components, inter alia, 'Provision of Breakfast to pre -primary and 
elementary classes', and revision of honorarium to Cook -Cum-Helpers in consultation with the 
Ministry of Finance. However, the Ministry of Finance did not recommend the newly propo sed 
component of Breakfast as well as revision of honorarium to Cook -Cum-Helpers. It may be noted 

32 
 
that the overall responsibilities for providing cooked and nutritious hot cooked meal to the eligible 
children lies with the State Governments and Union Terri tory Administrations in accordance with 
the Guidelines laid down by the Central Government.  The States and UTs fix their menu 
according to their local needs, in order to meet the nutritional content as prescribed in the 
Schedule II of National Food Securi ty Act, 2013.  Some States and UTs provide eggs etc. as 
additional item from their own resources. NFSA, 2013 provides for Hot Cooked Meals upto class 
VIII. However, as States and UTs are free to provide mea ls to students of up to class X also, some 
States and UTs do provide meals to students of classes IX and X also from their own resources. 
 
NATIONAL EDUCATION POLICY (NEP), 2020 
Recommendation 
10. Considering the importance of National Education Policy, a mechanism for duly 
publicizing the implementation of National Education Policy be set up with the help of 
Doordarshan and AIR as well as several social media platforms. This would help creating an 
enlightened understanding about the implementation of this policy that was evolved after a 
massive campaign for consultations.             (Para: 3.3.4)
  
Action Taken 
The Ministry of Education, Department of School Education and Literacy informed the 
Committee that it has taken various steps to create awareness among the different stakeholders 
including children and parents and rural population regarding the implementation of National 
Education Policy (NEP). 
 
It was also informed that a teacher’s fest, ‘Shi kshak Parv’ was especially organized from 
8th to 25th September 2020 for discussing various recommendations of NEP 2020 and its 
implementation strategies, which attracted around 15 lakh suggestions. These suggestions were 
incorporated in the development of  NEP Implementation Plan for School Education, called 
‘Students’ and Teachers’ Holistic Advancement through Quality Education (SARTHAQ)’ which 
was released on 08th April 2021. SARTHAQ is interactive, flexible and inclusive.  
 

33 
 
Another teacher’s fest in the series, ‘Shikshak Parv- 2021’ was organized from 7th to 17th 
September 2021 to generate awareness about the implementation of New Education Policy. 
ShikshakParv- 2021 experienced wide participation from practitioners of school education like 
Teachers, Principals, etc. who shared their experiences on webinars based on the theme: “Quality 
and Sustainable Schools: Learnings from Schools in India”.  The celebration of ‘Shikshak Parv 
2021’ not only encouraged innovative practices to ensure improved quality, incl usive practices 
and sustainability in the school education but also developed confidence in all Education 
Stakeholders for a successful implementation of the National Education Policy -2020 across the 
country. 
 
Further, ‘One year achievement booklet’ on var ious initiatives undertaken by the Ministry 
of Education for implementation of the NEP -2020 was released on 24th August 
2021(https://www.education.gov.in/sites/upload_files/mhrd/files/nep_achievement.pdf). It 
highlighted the efforts made by the Ministry fo r the implementation of NEP 2020 in a mission 
mode and accomplishing 62 major milestones which will transform the school education sector. 
 
In addition, social media campaign was run by the Department of School Education and 
Literacy in the months of Decem ber, 2021 and January, 2022 on Twitter and Facebook for 
creating awareness among masses regarding the numerous achievements of the Ministry of 
Education in respect of implementation of various initiatives taken by the Department under the 
purview of NEP -2020. A campaign with theme #NEP2020InAction, was run on Twitter from 1st 
December, 2021 onwards. It highlighted Ministry’s various schemes/ initiatives including those 
targeted at the rural India. Posts with this hashtag reached 55,67,126 people till 28th F ebruary, 
2022.The faculty members of NCERT have participated in various webinars for publicizing and 
implementation of NEP organised by various academic organisations. 
 
EXEMPLAR SCHOOLS 
Recommendation 
11. The Committee recommends that the Department may make efforts to expedite the process 
of approval of the Scheme regarding exemplar schools (PM SHRI – PM Schools for Rising India) 
so that the allocated funds find gainful utilization and such role model Scho ols become shining 
examples of the New India. The Committee would like the Department to prepare a comparative 

34 
 
review report of the schools which have been decided to be upgraded to exemplar schools and 
those which will be included during the year.          (Para: 3.4.2) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry in their written replies informed the Committee that Hon'ble  Finance 
Minister in her budget speech on 01.02.2021 has made the following announcement: “More than 
15,000 schools will be qualitatively strengthened to include all components of the National 
Education Policy. They shall emerge as exemplar schools in their regions, handholding and 
mentoring other schools to achieve the ideals of the Policy.” It was therefore, informed that 
Exemplar Schools scheme, is inten ded to prepare schools of excellence in which every student 
feels welcomed and cared for, where a safe and stimulating learning environment exists, where a 
wide range of learning experiences are offered, and where good physical infrastructure and 
appropriate resources conducive to learning are available to all students. The project covers more 
than 15000 schools managed by the Central Government/State/UT Government/local bodies. 
More than 20 lakh students are expected to be the direct beneficiaries of the s cheme. It will 
nurture students in a way that they become engaged, productive, and contributing citizens for 
building an equitable, inclusive, and plural society as envisaged by the National Education Policy 
2020. The Exemplar schools will help showcase th e implementation of the National Education 
Policy 2020 and emerge as exemplars and schools of excellence over a period of time. The 
Scheme is proposed to be implemented over a period of 5 years w.e.f. 2022 -23 to 2026 -27. The 
proposed centrally sponsored scheme of setting up of Exemplar schools is currently under 
consideration of competent authority for approval. 
 
STRENGTHENING TEACHING -LEARNING AND RESULTS FOR STATES (STARS) 
PROJECT 
Recommendation 
12. The Committee notes the objectives of this new STARS P roject and hopes that the 
partnership between India and the World Bank for strengthening public school education will be 
able to support the country’s goal of providing ‘education for all’.  The Committee observes that 
STARS Project will be able to launch new initiatives and introduce desired reforms to address the 
‘learning outcome’ challenge and will help students in their future. The Committee recommends 

35 
 
that State -wise progress made under the Project be continuously evaluated by setting up a 
coordinating mechanism of all stakeholders.            (Para: 3.5.4) 
 
Action Taken 
The Committee was informed that the State -wise progress as per DLIs and SIG manual of 
STARS Project is being verified by Independent Verification Agency. 'Project Management Unit 
(PMU)' is being set up under the STARS Project for monitoring and coordination among all 
stakeholders for reviewing progress of the States/UTs. 
 
ORGANIZATIONS/ BODIES UNDER DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & 
LITERACY (MINSTRY OF EDUCATION) NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL 
RESEARCH AND TRAINING (NCERT) AND CENTRAL BOARD OF SECONDARY 
EDUCATION (CBSE) 
Recommendation 
13. In respect of the Budgetary allocation, the Committee notes that the allocation in BE 2022-
23 for NCERT is Rs. 58 crore more than in the RE 2021 -22. It is also noted that out of the 
allocation of Rs. 452 crore in RE 2021 -22, the amount used as on 31.1.2022 is only 310.01 crore. 
The Committee recommends that NCERT must review the activities in which utilization has been 
low so as to take corrective action and also take steps to make use of the enhanced funds allocated 
in BE 2022-23.            (Para: 4.1.10)  
 
Action Taken 
The Ministry informed that due to pandemic situation, most of the programmes approved 
under Project Approval Board (PAB) and Progra mme Advisory Committee (PAC) by the Council 
during the financial year 2021 -22 were carried out in virtual mode. The funds allocated for the 
programmes are not utilised fully due to the conversion of many programmes into virtual mode. 
The face -to-face train ing programmes like National Initiative for School Heads' and Teachers' 
Holistic Advancement (NISHTHA) were converted into digital mode and transacted online. The 
Kala Utsav, seminars and meetings were organized in virtual mode which led to non -utilization of 

36 
 
funds. However, the activities were carried out using the digital mode and outcomes were 
achieved. Corrective actions and steps have been chalked out by NCERT for the maximum 
utilisation of the funds during the financial year 2022-23. 
 
Recommendation  
14. Considering the fact that Kendriya Vidyalayas have become a brand of quality education, 
whereas hundreds of Zila Parishad Schools and Municipal Schools are suffering for want of 
adequate resources and quality teachers, the Committee recommends that a s cheme be thought of 
for conversion of Zila Parishad and Municipal Schools into Kendriya  Vidyalayas wherever the 
local bodies are willing to provide resources.         (Para: 4.1.12)
  
Action Taken 
The Committee was informed by the Department that Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan 
(KVS) is an autonomous organization under the Department of School Education & Literacy, 
Ministry of Education registered under the Societies registration Act (XXI of 1860) to maintain 
and run the Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs) in the countr y and fully funded by the Ministry of 
Education, Government of India. 
 
It was also informed that opening of new Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs) is a continuous 
process. KVs are opened primarily to cater to the educational needs of the wards of transferable 
Central Government Employees including Defence & Para -Military personnel, Central 
Autonomous Bodies, Central Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) and Central Institute of Higher 
Learning (IHL) by providing a common programme of education throughout the country. 
Proposals for opening of new KVs are considered only if sponsored by Ministries or Departments 
of the Government of India / State Governments / Union Territories (UTs) Administrations and 
committing resources for setting up a new KV. The proposals received f rom various sponsoring 
authorities found fulfilling the mandatory pre-requisites for opening of new KVs are subject to the 
approval of the competent authority. Although demands/requests have been received time to time 
from the various Ministries/Department s/Organizations of Govt. of India to take over the schools 
run by them, KVS does not take over any existing schools due to critical issues relating to medium 

37 
 
of instructions, curricular pattern, board affiliation and HR related issues as well as financial 
implications. At present, there is no proposal under consideration to take over any such school. 
 
 
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN (KVS) AND NAVODAYA VIDYALAYA 
SAMITI (NVS) 
Recommendation  
15. The Committee notes that the budgetary allocation to Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan 
(KVS) and Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti (NVS) has been steadily increasing. It was submitted that a 
substantial part of it goes towards salaries of teachers and support staff and  thus the allocation is 
proving inadequate in opening new Schools and enhancing existing infrastructure. The Committee 
was of the view that over the years, KVS has emerged as a reputed brand and parents all over the 
country are desirous for admission of their children in KVS schools. The Committee also notes the 
slow pace of opening of new KVS schools and the procedural bottlenecks in this regard, and 
therefore, recommends opening of at least one new KVS school in each district of the country 
where they are  not present yet. The Committee also recommends that KVS and NVS can 
coordinate in respect of opening of new Schools so as to fulfil the aspirations of good quality 
Schools in areas where KVS are not there. The Committee also recommends that the Department  
in coordination with KVS authorities/ other stakeholders should make efforts to expedite the 
process of land transfer, etc. so that new KVS schools could be opened at the earliest.  
(Para: 4.2.9)  
Action Taken 
The Department in their written replies furni shed that Navodaya Vidyalaya Scheme 
provides for opening of one JNV in each district of the country. All the 638 districts carved out as 
on 31.05.2014 have been covered under Navodaya Vidyalaya Scheme and second additional JNVs 
have also been sanctioned in  23 districts. Accordingly, Total 661 JNVs have been sanctioned as 
on date, out of which 650 a re functional & 11 are non -functional for want of suitable land & 
temporary accommodation. A proposal for opening of 57 JNVs in the district s carved out after 
31.05.2014 is under consideration of the Government. 
 

38 
 
Kendriya Vidyalayas are opened to cater the educational needs of the wards of transferable 
Central Government employees including Defence and Para -Military Personnel by providing a 
common programme of educ ation. Along with the education , Kendriya Vidyalayas initiate and 
promote experimentation and innovativeness in education among children in collaboration with 
other bodies like the CBSE, NCERT etc., and  at present, 1248 Kendriya Vidyalayas are 
functioning across the country including 03 abroad (i.e. KV Moscow, KV Kathmandu and KV 
Tehran).  Kendriya Vidyalayas are not opened on the criteria of State/ UT/ District -wise. Opening 
of new Kendriya Vidyalayas is an ongoing process. Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan is in the 
process of opening 54 new Kendriya Vidyalayas. 
 
Sponsoring Authority i.e. Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of 
Railways and State Govt. etc. is required to transfer suitable piece of land as per KVS norms to 
KVS on Lease/Permanent transfer basis prior to opening of new Kendriya Vidyalayas. Necessary 
administrative sanction orders for starting the new KVs will be issued immediately after transfer 
of land in favour of KVS and thereafter KV will be made functional in the temporary 
accommodation provided by sponsoring authority till KVS constructs its own building. At present, 
following land norms are being followed by KVS: 
 
Sl. No. Location Extent limit for 
opening new KV (in 
acres) 
Desirable extent of 
land (in acres) 
01 Metropolitan city (Like Delhi, 
Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai and 
Hyderabad & Bangalore)/ 
Hilly/LWE area/NER 
2.5 acres 5.00 acres 
 
02 Urban Area / Semi -Urban/ Rural 
Area  
5.00 acres 10.00 acres 
 
 
It was also informed that at present 1248 KVs (As on 01.04.2022)  are functioning across the 
country, out of which 989 KVs (151 KVs in project/ institute of higher learning including 03 in 
abroad, 838 KVs in civil & defence sector) are functioning in their own permanent school 
building. Remaining 259 KVs are functioning  in the temporary accommodation provided by 
sponsoring authority. In 48 KVs , construction activity is at various stages. In 153 KVs, 

39 
 
construction of permanent school building yet to be started. In the remaining 58 KVs, land transfer 
formalities are yet to be completed by sponsorin g agencies. KVS has made concerted  efforts at 
various levels for transfer of land in these 58 KVs in favour of KVS, including: 
(i) Letters from Hon’ble Minister of Education to Chief Ministers of the States concerned 
for transfer of land in favour of KVS. 
(ii) Letters from Secretary, Ministry of Education to Chief Secretary of the States concerned/ 
Administrator for transfer of land. 
(iii) Letters from Commissioner, KVS to Chief Secretary of the States concerned for transfer 
of land in favour of KVS. 
(iv) Regular follow up by the Deputy Commissioners, KVS, ROs with Sponsoring agencies. 
Recommendation  
16. The Committee also recommends for preparation of a blueprint for use of enhanced 
allocation for KVS towards enhancement of services and infrastructure and seek additional funds 
at RE stage based on such concrete analysis. The Committee also advocates that KVS and NVS 
should take steps to handhold other neighbourhood schools in respect of methodology of their 
teaching and content so that ot her Schools also get to benefit from the best educational practices 
that the KVS/NVS schools have crystallized over the years.       (Para: 4.2.10)  
Action Taken 
The Committee was informed that the benefits of Navodaya Vidyalaya Scheme are 
provided to the neighborhood schools through Pace setting Activities of JNVs, details of which 
are as under: 
 
Pace Setting Activities of NVS: 
One of the basic objectives of the Navodaya Vidyalaya Scheme has been to enable the 
JNVs to play the role of pace -setting institution in the field of school education in their respective 
districts. The aim of the pace setting activities is to galvanize the academic, social, cultural and 
community oriented environment of schools, in the vicinity. By virtue of having a highly qualified  
and competent team of teachers, good laboratories and IT infrastructure, teaching aids and sports 
equipment and rich libraries , JNVs are in a position to function as a focal point for improvement 
in the quality of school education in general, through sharing of experience and facilities. Schools 

40 
 
also make general attempts to involve the local school community in disseminating the modern 
school practices with a view to improve school eco-system. 
Activities carried out in JNVs are as under: 
Academic Excellence 
 Innovations and experimentations in the teaching-learning process. 
 Training/ workshop of teachers to adopt the latest educational technology. 
 Optimum use of Vidyalaya laboratories and library. 
 Use of Mathematics and junior science laboratories. 
 Use of ICT in classroom transaction. 
 Effective communication and computation skills. 
 Personal Counselling, career counselling and motivational sessions. 
Co-curricular Activities 
 Participation of the students of the neighbouring schools in the co -curricular 
activities of the JNV. 
 Competitions and exhibitions. 
 Programmes for the neighbouring schools on awareness of issues like 
 conservation of nature, road safety, 
 first aid, cleanliness, civic sense and democratic values and scientific 
 temperament. 
 Scouts and Guides and adventure activities. 
 Organizing Youth Parliament and workshops in Fine Arts and Performing Art. 
Community Services 
 Coaching of rural children for Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya  Selection Test  
(JNVST). 
 Organizing immunization camps, health check up camps, first aid training camps, 
pollution control and cleanliness drive, literacy campaign etc. 
 Providing mobile library for rural learners. 
 Organizing awareness campaigns on health and hygiene, safe drinking  water, 
population education, balanced diet, disaster management, RTI  and consumer laws, 
child labour and Right to Education (RTE). 

41 
 
 Organizing street plays for the promotion of scientific spirit, conservation  of 
nature and energy, water harvesting, tree plantation, family planning, education for 
the girl child, balanced diet and safe drinking water, pollution control and 
awareness of the evils of dowry system, female foetici de, alcohol and drug 
addiction, gambling, illiteracy and superstition etc. 
 Computer literacy programme. 
 Vermi-compost and mushroom culture under SUPW activities. 
As far as KVS is concerned, decision taken during 106th Board of Governors meeting held on 
15.11.2016, KVS is extending handholding support to government schools that are facing resource 
crunch in terms of infrastructure and are in close vicinity to KVs by sharing best practices in 
following ways: 
 
1. Jointly conducting training programs, workshops and seminars at school level. 
2. Giving exposure by inviting students and teachers to visit KV and witness various 
Science, Social Science Exhibition-cum-National Integration Camps etc. and other events 
(Annual Function Day, Annual Sports Day etc.) organized at  KV/Cluster / Regional / 
National level. 
3. Promoting healthy competition, collaboration and participation by conducting inter -
school activities and competitions in the field of Public Speaking, Exhibitions, Games & 
Sports and theme-based projects on Science & Technology. 
4. Promoting the skills development of children of government school by inviting them to 
visit KV on Saturdays and interact with KV teachers and use computer lab, Library and 
Resource Room and undergo hobby classes under the supervision of KV co mputer 
instructors/coaches of art/craft/music/dance etc. 
 
It was also informed that the Ministry has allocated BE of Rs.700.00 crore under grant for 
Creation of Capital Assets for the FY 2022 -23 for KVS. Additional requirement if any, will be 
considered at RE stage. 
 
***** 
 

42 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & 
LITERACY 
Recommendation 
1. The concept of Non -Formal Schools, home schooling, Ekal Vidyalayas or one teacher 
schools has been prevalent in many States for quite some time. A Study to assess their impact 
should be undertaken at the earliest. Also, it is recommended that a sociological study to be 
undertaken to underst and the reasons behind children remaining out of the school on their own 
volition.             (Para: 3.1.18) 
Action Taken 
The Committee has been informed by the Ministry that NEP 2020 recommends adopting 
both formal and non-formal pathways to learning. It inter-alia, suggests that 'To facilitate learning 
for all students, with special emphasis on Socio -Economically Disadvantaged Groups (SEDGs), 
the scope of school education will be broadened to facilitate multiple pathways to learning 
involving both formal  and non -formal education modes. Open and Distance Learning (ODL) 
Programmes offered by the National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS) and State Open Schools 
will be expanded and strengthened for meeting the learning needs of young people in India who 
are not able to attend a physical school'. 
It was further informed that NIOS has accordingly developed alternative educational 
programme, equivalent to the elementary education  programme of the formal education system 
providing elementary education at three levels viz. A, B and C which are equivalent to grade III, V 
and VIII  respectively. The target groups identified for Open Basic Education (OBE) programme 
are: 
 Children (6 -14 years) - School dropouts and left -outs from SSA; out -of-school children; 
children, in particular girls, of marginalized groups and children with special needs. 
 Adolescents and Adults (Above 14 years) – Dropouts; neo-literates; the adults, in particular 
women, of marginalized groups and first generation learners and qualified candidates of Basic 
Education Literacy Assessment of NLMA.  

43 
 
 NIOS has developed Self Learn ing Material in 14 Subjects in Hindi and English mediums at 
all the three levels of Open Basic Education programme.  
 NIOS has also developed Bhartiya Jnana Parampara courses at Open Basic Education (OBE) 
level i.e. Classes III, V, VIII . 
 Thirty five subjects are being offered at Secondary level and 41 subjects have been offered at 
Senior Secondary level including 12 languages 
Also, under Samagra Shiksha, support for special training of out of school children and child 
tracking is also provided, child wise d ata is being captured at PRABANDH portal. Guidelines for 
Children of Migrant Laborers and for identifying and mainstreaming out of school children has 
been developed and issued. Bridge course for OoSC from Preschool to Class VIII to provide 
support and mai nstream the OoSC has been developed by NCERT. Measures for mainstreaming 
of OoSC at secondary level through open schooling are supported through Samagra Shiksha. For 
out of school children at 16 to 19 years of age, support is provided to SC, ST, disabled c hildren, 
upto Rs 2000 per child per grade to complete their secondary/senior secondary levels through 
NIOS/SOS. 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee taking note of the information provided and observing that no study 
on these aspects has been undertaken till now, reiterates its recommendation for 
undertaking study about the impact of Non -formal Schools,  Home schooling, Ekal 
Vidyalayas or one teacher Schools and other such mechanisms in various States, to make a 
reasonable assessment about the deliverables they bring. Based on the experience of the 
States, the Department may formulate strategies through which the Non -formal mechanism 
of ed ucation can be further strengthened/improved. Also, the recommended sociological 
study would provide insights and will be helpful in identifying the causes which are keeping 
children out of the schooling system on their own volition.    
ORGANIZATIONS/ BODI ES UNDER DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & 
LITERACY (MINSTRY OF EDUCATION) NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL 
RESEARCH AND TRAINING (NCERT) AND CENTRAL BOARD OF SECONDARY 
EDUCATION (CBSE) 
 

44 
 
Recommendation 
2. The Committee notes with concern the huge number of v acancies in NCERT and CBSE 
and observes that since the role of both the bodies in successful implementation of National 
Education Policy (NEP), 2020 is paramount, such a vacancy backlog will surely reflect upon the 
strategies that have been devised for imp lementation of the NEP.  The Committee recommends 
that the Department must take necessary steps to bridge the existing vacancy situation.  
    (Para: 4.1.9) 
Action Taken 
The Department while addressing the above recommendation of the Committee informed 
that with regard to academic posts, NCERT has started recruitment process vide Advt. No.171 
inviting on -line applications for filling up 266 academic vacant posts. NCERT has  further 
amended qualifications in respect of 61 positions (16 posts), for which it has been proposed to 
publish an Addendum to this effect in the newspapers besides uploading the same on the NCERT 
website for wider publicity. This requires recruitment por tal of Delhi University to be configured 
with respect to only 61 positions (16 posts) so as to enable the interested and eligible candidates 
fill up the applications on the portal. The same is going to be issued after completion of the 
technicality formali ties on the recruitment portal of Delhi University. Further, the work of 
screening process of remaining 205 posts is in progress. It was also informed that with regard to 
Non-Academic posts, details of already advertised posts under direct quota is enclose d at 
Annexure-V. 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee notes the initiation of action towards bridging the existing vacancy 
situation in respect of NCERT. However, as recommended earlier, the Committee reiterates 
that institutions like NCERT/ CBSE should undertake action to analyse the expected 
student-faculty ratio so as to promptly fill up vacancies where they are a necessity.  
Recommendation  
3. As regards CBSE, it is noted that it is an autonomous body and does not receive any 
funding from the Ministry. Thus the only source for its funding is the fees/ charges collected from 
schools and students. Although the Committee recognizes this fact, it is of the view that the 

45 
 
regulations regarding fee, etc. should be flexible enough to address situations such as the 
pandemic which had adverse economic f allout on all sectors of the society as also on parents and 
students. The Committee also recommends that the Department examine the matter of such 
modifications in the fee sharing model/mechanism which is currently in place between CBSE and 
State Governments.              (Para: 4.1.11) 
Action Taken 
The Committee was informed by the Department that CBSE is an autonomous body and 
does not receive any funding from the Ministry/ any other source.  As far as the fees charged by 
the schools are concerned, and as  per the Affiliation Bye -laws of the Board under Chapter 7: 
School Fees, regulation of fees charged by schools is subject to the laws, regulations and direction 
of the Appropriate Government/concerned State Government. No fee regulation is done by the 
CBSE. 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee takes note of the parameters governing regulation of fees. However, it is of the 
view that the Department/CBSE should take up the matter of effecting requisite modifications in the 
fee sharing model/mechanism with the respective States, so that a practical solution becomes 
workable to tackle situations which may have such grave economic fallout with the potential to 
adversely impact the studies of lakhs of students who, for no fault of theirs, may find themselves 
caught in circumstances where their parents find it difficult to pay their regular fees. 
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN (KVS) AND NAVODAYA VIDYALAYA 
SAMITI (NVS) 
Recommendations 
4. Taking note of the possibility of a number of KVS schools located in PSU Projects shutting 
down as a consequence of closure of the PSUs (entities), the Committee recommends that the 
Department/ KVS must formulate a mechanism or relook at their MOUs with the PSU/ body to 
ensure continuity of such Project based KVS schools and st eps should be taken to ensure that 
education of any student of such KVS schools is not disrupted or enrolled students are not left in 
the lurch without any support.             
                      (Para: 4.2.11) 

46 
 
Action Taken 
The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated that KVS has initiated necessary action for 
revision of the MoU to be signed for opening of new Kendriya Vidyalaya under Project/  Institute 
of Higher Learning (IHL) sector incorporating new clauses to have better administrative control  
over the Project Sector KVs and to safeguard the interest of students ensuring their studies. 
Revised MoU is under examination in the Department. 
Comments of the Committee 
The thrust of the recommendation of the Committee was to take a relook at the MoUs 
or formulate  mechanism so that the studies of students presently enrolled in project based 
KVS schools do not get affected due to closure of PSUs. The Committee notes that though 
the Department has stated that they have initiated necessary action to addre ss such issue for 
future but no status/mechanism has been mentioned to handle the situation in cases of KVS 
Schools located in PSU Projects getting closed. Keeping in view the fact that a number of 
students are studying in such project-based schools, which are covered under existing MoUs, 
the Committee further recommends that KVS should undertake a feasibility study for 
managing such units and since opening new KVs to re -settle such students is a lengthy 
process, KVS should explore possibilities for digital  education at such centres or adjusting 
any attached students in other nearby schools like NVS etc. to prevent hampering of 
classroom studies of such students. 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-Nil-. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

48 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE (CHAPTER-III) 
SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & 
LITERACY 
The Committee taking note of the information provided and observing that no study 
on these aspects has been undertaken till now, reiterates its recommendation for 
undertaking study about the impact of Non -formal Schools,  Home schooling, Ekal 
Vidyalayas or one teacher Schools and other such mechanisms in various States, to make a 
reasonable assessment about the deliverables they bring. Based on the experience of the 
States, the Department may formulate strategies through which the Non -formal mechanism 
of ed ucation can be further strengthened/improved. Also, the recommended sociological 
study would provide insights and will be helpful in identifying the causes which are keeping 
children out of the schooling system on their own volition.         (Para: 3.1.18) 
ORGANIZATIONS/ BODIES UNDER DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & 
LITERACY (MINSTRY OF EDUCATION) NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL 
RESEARCH AND TRAINING (NCERT) AND CENTRAL BOARD OF SECONDARY 
EDUCATION (CBSE) 
The Committee notes the initiation of action towards  bridging the existing vacancy 
situation in respect of NCERT. However, as recommended earlier, the Committee reiterates 
that institutions like NCERT/ CBSE should undertake action to analyse the expected 
student-faculty ratio so as to promptly fill up vacancies where they are a necessity.  
    (Para: 4.1.9) 
The Committee takes note of the parameters governing regulation of fees. However, it is of the 
view that the Department/CBSE should take up the matter of effecting requisite modifications in the 
fee sharing model/mechanism with the respective States, so th at a practical solution becomes 
workable to tackle situations which may have such grave economic fallout with the potential to  
 

49 
 
adversely impact the studies of lakhs of students who, for no fault of theirs, may find 
themselves caught in circumstances where their parents find it difficult to pay their regular fees. 
                        (Para: 4.1.11) 
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN (KVS) AND NAVODAYA VIDYALAYA 
SAMITI (NVS) 
The thrust of the recommendation of the Committee was to take a relook at the MoUs 
or formulate  mechanism so that the studies of students presently enrolled in project based 
KVS schools do not get affected due to closure of PSUs. The Committee notes that though 
the Department has stated that they have initiated necessary action to address  such issue for 
future but no status/mechanism has been mentioned to handle the situation in cases of KVS 
Schools located in PSU Projects getting closed. Keeping in view the fact that a number of 
students are studying in such project-based schools, which are covered under existing MoUs, 
the Committee further recommends that KVS should undertake a feasibility study for 
managing such units and since opening new KVs to re -settle such students is a lengthy 
process, KVS should explore possibilities for digital e ducation at such centres or adjusting 
any attached students in other nearby schools like NVS etc. to prevent hampering of 
classroom studies of such students. 
             (Para: 4.2.11) 
 
 
 
*** 
 
 

50 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
(EWCY&S)  
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports (EWCY&S) met at 10:30 A.M. 
on Thursday, 15th December, 2022 in Committee Room No.4, A-Block, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
3. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
4. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
5. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
7.  Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
8.  Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
9.  Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
10. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
11. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
12. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
13. Shri Balak Nath 
14. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
15. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
16. Shri Dharambir Singh 
17. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
18. Shri S. Venkatesan 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Nirmala Bhatt, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
6. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
7. Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 

51 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He 
then informed that the agenda for the meeting was to deliberate upon and adoption of the following 
six draft Action Taken Reports of the Committee: 
a) * * * 
b) 343rd Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Thirty Sixth Report on 
Demands for Grants 2022-23 of the Department of School Education & Literacy, 
Ministry of Education;  
c) * * * 
d) * * * 
e) * * * 
f) * * * 
3.  The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid six draft Action Taken Reports one by 
one and after a brief discussion, adopted the same with minor changes in * and *  Reports. 
4. The Committee decided to present/lay the Report to both the Houses of Parliament during the 
upcoming Session of the Parliament. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri Vivek 
Thakur, Chairman of the Committee and in his absence, Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari, M.P. to 
present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha. Shri Rajendra Agrawal, M.P. and in his absence, Shri 
Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi, M.P. were authorized to lay the above mentioned Reports on the 
Table of Lok Sabha. 
5. * * * 
   6.   The meeting adjourned at 11:01 A.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                       A.K. Mallick  
15th December, 2022                                                                                               Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Pertains to other matter 

1 
 
 
 
 
Learning Outcomes of Children with Disabilities: 
Exploring the Determinants in Inclusive Classroom 
 
Abstract 
 
      The objectives of this project were to find out the teaching learning 
determinants of children with disabilities in Inclusive setting and to explore the 
existing classroom climate of Inclusive school at elementary level. 
In this descriptive research, purposive sampling technique was used for 
selection of sample. 32 CWSNs were selected from different Special schools of 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.  
  A tool on Learning Outcomes for CWSNs was developed by Project 
Investigators. The items were presented under three domains- Language, 
Mathematics, and Environmental Studies. A workshop was conducted for two 
days and experts from the special education and general education with 
expertise in the field of learning outcomes were invited for their guidance on 
developed tool and methods of data collection.  
                   The finally developed tool and the data recording sheet had four 
sections/columns to be completed by the professionals, who were engaged in 
collecting the data.  The data was collected from two schools of Rajasthan and 
two schools of Uttar Pradesh. The collected data (descriptions for each activity) 
was verified by three professionals working in the field of Inclusive/Special 
education.  
The qualitative descriptions were further analyzed and presented in 
deatail    . After obtaining quantitative data, with the help of SPSS, One way 
ANOVA and t test was conducted. It was found that the difference in total 
mean scores of CWSNs studying in Special and Inclusive schools is found 
statistically non-significant. It was also investigated that the difference in 
mean scores achieved by the various groups is although not significant in 
language and environmental science but it is significant in mathematics. 
Further, the performance of children with HI is far better than children with ID, 
and the difference in mean scores of these two groups is highly significant. It 
is also found that gender of CWSNs is does not make significant difference in 
their performance; however the locality of their school and the age group they 
belong is a significant criteria which makes the difference in their learning 
outcome of children with special needs at Primary level.   There were 
difference in responses in the different types of disabilities observed against various stimuli 
and hence the preferred stimuli must be considered for particular group of children with 
special needs. 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
The findings of the study are as follows: 
  It is investigated that the difference between the total mean scores of CWSNs 
studying in Special and Inclusive schools is statistically non-significant 
however the mean scores of CWSNs studying in Inclusive schools are 
comparatively better than the mean scores of CWSNs studying in Special 
schools in all the three domains of learning outcome checklist. Hence the role 
of inclusive education for CWSNs needs to be considered significantly in 
present scenario. 
 The performance of the children belonging to three different groups 
(VI/HI/ID) varies significantly in Mathematics compare to other two subjects 
(Language and EVS). 
 Further the performance of children with Hearing Impairment is 
comparatively very high than performance of children with ID especially in 
mathematics. The mean score shows great variation in abilities in different 
subject/areas within the group of children with Intellectual Disabilities, which 
itself explain the great challenge in front of the inclusive/special teacher for 
the successful Inclusion of children with ID at primary level. 
 When the mean score of the CWSNs from the two different states is 
compared, it is found that the mean scores of the CWSNs from Rajasthan is 
comparatively better than Uttarpradesh and Researcher identified three 
important reasons of achieving comparatively low scores by CWSNs from 
Uttarpradesh-(a) The mean age of CWSNs belong to Rajasthan is 9.6yrs, 
however the mean age of CWSNs from U.P. is 9.3yrs. (b) The number of 
special school from Rajasthan was 20 but the number of special school from 
U.P. is 23 and it was found that the combined total mean score of CWSNs 
from Special school is comparatively poor than the CWSNs from Inclusive 
school and (c) availability of children with ID with comparatively low 
IQ/higher level of retardation from the Uttarpradesh among the selected 
samples. 

3 
 
 It is concluded that gender of CWSNs is does not make significant difference 
in their performance; however the locality of their school may bring 
difference in their performance in functional academics. 
 It is concluded that like children without disability, age is a significant criteria 
which makes the difference in their performance of children with special 
needs.   
 There were difference in responses in the different types of disabilities 
observed against various stimuli and hence the preferred stimuli must be 
considered for particular group of children with special needs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION
ln the year 2006 National focus group on education of children with special
needs (NCERT) discusses the issues relating to the provisions, practices and curricular
concerns for children with Special Educational Needs. They recommended making all
schools inclusive by reviewing barriers created by admission procedures (screening,
identification, parental interaction, selection and evaluation), this should include private
schools; buildingthecapacityofteacherstofunctioninaninclusivesetting;makingthe
curriculum flexible and appropriate to accommodate the diversity of school children
including those with disability in both cognitive and non-cognitive areas; making support
services available in the form of technology {including ICT), teaching-learning materials
and specialists; involving parents, family, and the community at all stages of education
ln the year 2AO2, Jha M.M. quoted that barriers to access and success can be
viewed in physical as well as structural sense. But more than that, it is the curriculum,
the pedagogy, the examination and the school's approach, which create barriers. Unless
these unseen barriers are taken care of, access to all children and an assurance of
success to all would remain a far cry. The inclusive education movement, combined with
technological development and a new approach to open schooling has come at this
crucial juncture. Countries 4nd school systems choosing a holistic approach to access
and success are more likely to succeed in reaching educltion for all.
For the present study Learning difficulties refer to the learners who are facing
problems in reading, writing and math which are not because of other kind of disability
like visual, hearing and physical impairment.
During SCC Meetin g 2017 it was raising un irrr" regarding the need of
identification of students with learning difficulties in the elementary schools of
Nagaland. Only the identification of these children may not help us to plan and provide
corrective measures. Therefore, it was proposed to study about the state of learning
difficulties and support systems available in the elementary schools of Nagaland.

$
s
I
I
?
?
??
f
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
??
?
??
?
???
??
RESEARCH QUESTIONS
1. What is the state of students with Learning Difficulties in the elementary
schools of Nagaland?
2. What are the support systems available for children with Learning Difficulties
in the elementary schools of Nagaland'
PROCESS
A quantitative approach was adopted for answering to the research questions.
Participants of the study students with learning difficulties {SwLD} from elementary
schools of Nagaland. Their identity is not disclosed instead numeric code was assigned.
They were identified by gender, grade level and school administrator. The purpose of
the study was to identify children with learning difficulties and support systems available
at elementary schools of Nagaland.
Two digital based checklists were developed, these are to fill by class teachers
and school authority.
Firstly, Proforma A: Checklist for identifliing children with learning difficulties in
elementary schools, is the one which needs to bd filled by the class teacher. The purpose
of this checklist is to identify the difficulties and its level facing by SwLD in elementary
school. The checklist consists five domains viz. language skills, reading skills, writing
skills, math skills and attention and 83 items (13 for language, L6 for reading, 2A for
writing, 23 for math and tL for attention), also it has a provision for giving other
observation and information they want to share. Five rating scale system was followed
in this proforma viz. always, frequently, sometimes, never and not noticed.
Secondly, Proforma B: Checklist for identifliing support systems fbr educating
children with learning difficulties in elementary schools. The purpose of the checklist is
to collect information on basic requirements for providing services for SwLD in
?o

s
o
c
o
I
?o
I
?
elementary schools. The items in this tool was listed under five domains, they are
infrastructure, teaching and learning, additional educational supports, support for
equality and moral & emotional. The basic required amenities were listed as options to
respond, and number of options differed from item to item. ltems related to the
infrastructure were focused on accessibility and suitability for educating SwLD.
Collecting information about teaching learning materials, teaching lesson, teaching
approaches and techniques, resource room equipment, resource roorn teaching,
curriculum accommodation and evaluation were fulfilled under the domain of teaching
and learning. Other supports like assistive and adaptive technology for reading, writing,
mobility, computation are the main focus under the domain of additional education
supports. The items were prepared in a simple statement with common wordings and
examples.
Both the checklist was validated during a workshop organized for two days by
inviting five resource persons from the field. To make the checklist convenient to the
respondent a pop up balloon showing the guide and examples related to the item was
added to each item. Director, School Education, Nagaland was approached to support in
collecting the data from the elementary schools of Nagaland. With an official notification
frorn Director to all the schogls having elementary level classes, an official mail was sent
from Director along with the developed checklists and inbtructional guide. The cheeklist
was filled and sent back to the Project ln-charge and a copy of Director SE. Project ln-
charge and Project staff was visited Mokokchung, Kohima and Dimapur to interact with
school authority, SwLD and observe the facilities available in the school. Collected data
were fed into Microsoft excel and transferred to SPSS 21 for further analyzation of the
data to answer the research questions.
:)
+;

49 
 
ANNEXURE III 
 
The detailed break -up of the allocation under Scheme and Non -Scheme in Revenue 
Heads in BE and RE (2021-22) and BE (2022-23) and percentage change/variation in allocations 
and utilization is given below: 
TABLE: 2  
 
                                     (Rs. in crores) 
 Actuals 
2020-21 
BE 2021-22 RE 2021-22 BE 2022-23 Variations 
(Percentage) 
Scheme Non-
Scheme 
Scheme Non-
Scheme 
Scheme Non-
Scheme 
BE 
2021-22 
& BE 
2022-23 
RE 
2021-22 
& BE 
2022-23 
Revenue 51845.62 43648.66 11225.00 40862.70 11107.25 51052.37 12397.00 +15.63% +22.09% 
Capital - - - - - - - - - 
Total 51845.62 43648.66 11225.00 40862.70 11107.25 51052.37 12397.00 +15.63% +22.09% 
 
 
  The scheme-wise details of expenditure of Department of School Education & Literacy 
as on 31.01.2022 with respect to Revised Estimates 2021-22 is as under: 
 
TABLE: 3 
 
(Rs. in crores) 
Sl 
No. Schemes/Non Schemes 
Budget 
Estimates 
2021-22       
Revised 
Estimates 
2021-22 
Actuals as 
on 
31.01.2022 
A Schemes 
I Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
1 Samagra Shiksha 31050.16 30000.00 16821.70 
2 Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Nirman (PM-
POSHAN) 11500.00 10233.75 6630.61 
3 New India Literacy Programme (NILP) 250.00 2.75 1.70 
4 Strengthening Teaching-Learning and Results 
for States (STARS) 485.00 340.00 118.40 
  Total Centrally Sponsored Schemes 43285.16 40576.50 23572.41 
II Central Sector Schemes       
5 National Means Cum Merit Scholarship 
Scheme 350.00 284.20 1.22 
6 National Scheme for Incentive to Girl Child 
for Secondary Education 1.00 0.00 0.00 
7 National Award to Teachers 1.50 1.00 0.24 
8 Operation Digital Board 1.00 0.00 0.00 
9 Pradhan Mantri Innovative Learning 
Programme (DHRUV) 10.00 1.00 0.00 

50 
 
  Total Central Sector Schemes 363.50 286.20 1.46 
  Total Schemes 43648.66 40862.70 23573.87 
B Non-Schemes       
III Other Central Sector Expenditure       
10 KendriyaVidyalayaSangathan (KVS) 6800.00 6800.00 5644.75 
11 Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti (NVS) 3800.00 3740.00 2587.68 
12 NCERT  500.00 452.00 310.01 
13 Central Tibetan Schools Administration 70.00 61.95 41.33 
14 National Bal Bhawan 22.00 19.00 12.49 
  Total Autonomous Bodies 11192.00 11072.95 8596.26 
IV Establishment Expenditure       
15 Secretariat 30.00 31.69 25.27 
16 Directorate of Adult Education 3.00 2.61 1.92 
  Total - Establishment 33.00 34.30 27.19 
  Total Non-Schemes 11225.00 11107.25 8623.45 
  Grand Total  54873.66 51969.95 32197.32 
 
 The details of projections of funds made and allocated in BE (2022 -23) for 
schemes/projects under the Department and percentage change/variations over BE/RE (2021 -22) 
are as under: 
TABLE: 4 
(Rs. in crores) 
Sl 
No
. 
SCHEMES/NON 
SCHEMES 
Actuals 
2020-
21 
BE 
2021-
22       
RE 
2021-
22 
Project
ions to 
MoF 
for BE 
2022-
23 
BE 
2022-
23 
Variations (in 
percentage)   
BE 
2022-23 
over RE 
2021-22 
BE 
2022-23 
over 
projecti
ons to 
MoF 
BE 
2022-
23 
over 
BE 
2021-
22 
A Schemes       
I Centrally Sponsored Schemes       
1 Samagra Shiksha 27834.
58 
31050.1
6 
30000.0
0 
38825.0
0 
37383.
36 24.61% -3.71% 20.40
% 
2 
PradhanMantriPoshan 
Shakti Nirman (PM-
POSHAN) 
12878.1
5 
11500.0
0 
10233.7
5 
10233.7
5 
10233.
75 0.00% 0.00% 
-
11.01
% 
3 New India Literacy 
Programme (NILP) 78.15 250.00 2.75 127.00 127.00 4518.18
% 0.00% 
-
49.20
% 
4 Appointment of 
Language Teachers 10.49 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00       
5 Umbrella Programme 
for Development of 214.28 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00       

51 
 
Sl 
No
. 
SCHEMES/NON 
SCHEMES 
Actuals 
2020-
21 
BE 
2021-
22       
RE 
2021-
22 
Project
ions to 
MoF 
for BE 
2022-
23 
BE 
2022-
23 
Variations (in 
percentage)   
BE 
2022-23 
over RE 
2021-22 
BE 
2022-23 
over 
projecti
ons to 
MoF 
BE 
2022-
23 
over 
BE 
2021-
22 
Minorities-Education 
Scheme for Madrasas 
and Minorities 
6 
Strengthening 
Teaching-Learning 
and Results for States 
(STARS) 
91.77 485.00 340.00 1050.00 550.00 61.76% -47.62% 13.40
% 
7 Exemplar  0.00 0.00 0.00 3840.84 1800.00   -53.14%   
8 ASPIRE 0.00 0.00 0.00 700.00 600.00   -14.29%   
  Total Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes 
41107.4
2 
43285.1
6 
40576.5
0 
54776.5
9 
50694.1
1 24.93% -7.45% 17.12
% 
II Central Sector 
Schemes                 
9 
National Means Cum 
Merit Scholarship 
Scheme 
321.11 350.00 284.20 374.21 350.00 23.15% -6.47% 0.00% 
10 
National Scheme for 
Incentive to Girl Child 
for Secondary 
Education 
0.17 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00     
-
100.00
% 
11 National Award to 
Teachers 0.68 1.50 1.00 5.00 5.00 400.00% 0.00% 233.33
% 
12 Operation Digital 
Board 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00     
-
100.00
% 
13 
Pradhan Mantri 
Innovative Learning 
Programme (DHRUV) 
0.00 10.00 1.00 1.00 3.26 226.00% 226.00% 
-
67.40
% 
  Total Central Sector 
Schemes 321.96 363.50 286.20 380.21 358.26 25.18% -5.77% -
1.44% 
  Total Schemes 41429.3
8 
43648.6
6 
40862.7
0 
55156.8
0 
51052.3
7 24.94% -7.44% 16.96
% 
B Non-Schemes                 
III Other Central Sector 
Expenditure                 
14 KendriyaVidyalayaSa
ngathan (KVS) 6436.00 6800.00 6800.00 8435.30 7650.00 12.50% -9.31% 12.50
% 

52 
 
Sl 
No
. 
SCHEMES/NON 
SCHEMES 
Actuals 
2020-
21 
BE 
2021-
22       
RE 
2021-
22 
Project
ions to 
MoF 
for BE 
2022-
23 
BE 
2022-
23 
Variations (in 
percentage)   
BE 
2022-23 
over RE 
2021-22 
BE 
2022-23 
over 
projecti
ons to 
MoF 
BE 
2022-
23 
over 
BE 
2021-
22 
15 Navodaya Vidyalaya 
Samiti (NVS) 3478.87 3800.00 3740.00 4778.49 4115.00 10.03% -13.88% 8.29% 
16 NCERT  388.42 500.00 452.00 591.70 510.00 12.83% -13.81% 2.00% 
17 
Central Tibetan 
Schools 
Administration 
69.19 70.00 61.95 70.93 62.00 0.08% -12.59% 
-
11.43
% 
18 National Bal Bhawan 15.48 22.00 19.00 25.77 22.00 15.79% -14.63% 0.00% 
  Total Autonomous 
Bodies 
10387.9
6 
11192.0
0 
11072.9
5 
13902.1
9 
12359.0
0 11.61% -11.10% 10.43
% 
IV Establishment 
Expenditure                 
19 Secretariat 26.08 30.00 31.69 39.00 35.00 10.44% -10.26% 16.67
% 
20 Directorate of Adult 
Education 2.20 3.00 2.61 4.50 3.00 14.94% -33.33% 0.00% 
  Total - 
Establishment 28.28 33.00 34.30 43.50 38.00 10.79% -12.64% 15.15
% 
                    
  Total Non-Schemes 10416.2
4 
11225.0
0 
11107.2
5 
13945.6
9 
12397.0
0 11.61% -11.11% 10.44
% 
  Grand Total  51845.6
2 
54873.6
6 
51969.9
5 
69102.4
9 
63449.3
7 22.09% -8.18% 15.63
% 
 