PARLIAMENT
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August
  
TWO HUNDRED 
 
Performance of National Sports Development Fund
Recruitment and Promotion 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
  
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
ugust, 2016/Sravana, 1938 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY FIRST REPORT 
of National Sports Development Fund
And 
Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons (Part-III) 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th August, 2016) 
aid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th August, 2016) 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
REPORT NO. 
281 
 
of National Sports Development Fund 
III)  

PARLIAMENT
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL
 
TWO HUNDRED 
Performance of National Sports Development Fund
Recruitment and Promotion of 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
TWO HUNDRED EITHTY FIRST REPORT 
 
Performance of National Sports Development Fund
And 
Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons (Part-III) 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th August, 2016) 
aid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th August, 2016) 
 
 
 
  
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2016/Sravana, 1938 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
 
Performance of National Sports Development Fund 
III)  

C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …...........................................................  (i)-(ii) 
2.         PREFACE..................................................................................................................  (iii) 
3.  *LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS ……….......…............................................................  (iv) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…............................         
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE ...   
5. *MINUTES.............................................................................................. ................    
6. *ANNEXURES.................................................................................................. ..   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
*Appended on printing stage 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2015-16) 
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya      Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
3. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
4. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
5. *Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar 
6. @Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
7. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
8. Shri Sharad Pawar 
9. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa 
10. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat 
12.  Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman 
13. ) Shri C.R. Chaudhary 
14.       Shrimati Bhawana Gawali Patil 
15.       Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha 
16.       Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
17.       Prof. Chintamani Malviya 
18.       Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra 
19.       Shri Chand Nath 
20.       Shri Hari Om Pandey 
21.       Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
22.       Shri N.K. Premachandran 
23.       Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
24.       Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran 
25.       Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
26.       Shri M.I. Shanavas 
27.       Dr. Nepal Singh 
28.       Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh 
29.       Shri P.R. Sundaram 
30.       +Shri Ajay Tamta 
31.       Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher 
32. #Shri Pratap Singh Bajwa 
33. %Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad  
 
___________________________ 
* Ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f .21.3.2016 
# Shri Pratap Singh Bajwa nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f  20.5.2016 
) Shri C.R. Choudhary was elevated to Minister of HRD on 5.7.2016 
+ Shri Ajay Tamta was elevated to Minister of State on 5.7.2016 
%Ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f 
@Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f  20.5.2016 
 
(i) 

           SECRETARIAT 
Shri K.P. Singh, Additional Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director 
Smt. R.K. Mecolt Singh, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
  

P R E F A C E 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and Eighty-first Report 
of the Committee on the subject ‘Performance of National Sports Development Fund and Recruitment and 
Promotion of Sportspersons - Part III '.  
2.  The Committee visited the LNCPE, Thiruvananthapuram, SAI Stadium at Kandivalli in Mumbai, 
Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium Complex in New Delhi, SAI Sports Complex in Khelgram and Tatya Tope 
Sports Complex (STC) in Bhopal and Achhutananda Guru Akhara in Ujjain. The Committee also heard the 
views of the representatives of Cochin Port Trust (CPT), Cochin Shipyard Ltd. (CSL), Fertilizer and 
Chemicals Tranvacore Ltd. (FACTL), Hindustan Newsprint Ltd. (HNL), Hindustan Lifecare Ltd. (HLL), 
Canara Bank, State Bank of Travancore (SBT), Federal Bank, Dhanalaxmi Bank, Union Bank of India, 
Central Bank of India, Bank of India, IDBI Bank, Dena Bank, Bank of Maharashtra, HDFC Bank, Axis 
Bank, ICICI Bank, Central Customs (Central Board of Excise and Customs), Mumbai, New India 
Assurance Company, Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT), Mumbai Port Trust (MPT), Mazagoan Docks 
Ltd., State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur (SBBJ), Punjab National Bank (PNB), Bank of Baroda (BOB) 
Oriental Bank of Commerce (OBC), India Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd. (IIFCL), National Building 
Construction Corporation (NBCC), Food Corporation of India (FCI), HUDCO, MMTC, GAIL, NTPC, 
SAIL, Power Finance Corporation, Power Grid Corporation of India, Container Corporation of India 
(CONCOR), Department of Food and Public Distribution, Department of Commerce, Department of Public 
Enterprises, Department of Heavy Industry, Department of Financial Services, Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, Department  of Defence Production, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Ministry of 
Steel, Ministry of Power, Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Urban Development, 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Nevyeli Lignite Ltd. 
(NLL), IDPL, CPCL, Kamarajar Port Ltd.  (Ennore Port), United India Insurance Company Ltd, Indian 
Overseas Bank (IOB), Indian Bank, local heads of SBI, Canara Bank, Andhra Bank, State Bank of 
Hyderabad, Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL), Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Dredging Corporation of India, 
NTPC, AP Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, Central Bank of India, local heads of Allahabad Bank, 
BOB, BOI, PNB, SBI, UBI, representatives of Northern Coalfield Ltd., BHEL, Narmada Hydroelectric 
Development Corporation, Bridgestone India Pvt. Ltd., Tata international Ltd., IPCA Lab Ltd., CIPLA Ltd., 
Symbiotec Pharma Lab. Ltd. and Ranbaxy Ltd. alongwith the authorities of Department of Sports and 
officials by State Governments of Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and 
Madhya Pradesh to have an idea about their contribution to National Sports Development Fund and to 
explore how they can promote sports and recruitment of sportspersons  
 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the subject and adopted the same in its meeting held on 
the 3rd August, 2016.  
4. For facility of the reference, observations and recommendations of Committee have been printed in bold 
letters at end of Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
NEW DELHI 
August 3, 2016 
Sravana 12, 1938 (Saka) 
  
 
DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary  
              Standing Committee on  Human Resource Development                                                                   

 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
1. BHEL   Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited 
2. FCI  Food Corporation of India  
3. MMTC Metals and Minerals Trading Corporation of India 
4.  NBCC National Buildings Construction Corporation 
5. SAIL Steel Authority of India Limited 
6. SAI Sports Authority of India  
7. SRC Sports Resource Centre  
8. CPSEs Central Public Sector Enterprises 
9.  PSUs Public Sector Undertakings  
10. PSBs Public Sector Banks  
11.  PNB Punjab National Bank  
12. SBH State Bank of Hyderabad  
13. NSDF National Sports Development Fund 
14. CSR Corporate Social Responsibility  
15. LNCPE Laxmibai National College of Physical Education 
16. HUDCO Housing and Urban Development 
17. GAIL Gas Authority of India Ltd. 
18. NTPC National Thermal Power Corporation 
19. CONCOR Contain Corporation of India Ltd. 
20. NLC Nevyeli Lignite Ltd. 
21. IDPL Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 
22. CPCL Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd. 
23. IOB Indian Overseas Bank 
24. SBI State Bank of India 
25. RINL Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. 
26. HSL Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. 
27. CPT Cochin Port Trust 
28. CSL Cochin Shipyard Ltd. 
29. FACT Fertilizers and Chemicals Tranvacore Ltd. 

30. HNL Hindustan Newsprint Ltd. 
31. HLL Hindustan Lifecare Ltd. 
32. SBT State Bank of Travancore 
33. CBEC Central Board of Excise and Customs 
34. SBBJ State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur 
35. BOB Bank of Baroda  
36. OBC Oriental Bank of Commerce 
37. IIFCL India Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd. 
38. REIL Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments Ltd. 
39. DFS Department of Financial Services 
40. STC Sports Training Complex 
41. RGKA Rajiv Gandhi Khel Abhiyan 
42. CoE Centre of Excellence 
43. WHO World Health Organization 
44. AISNIS Netaji Subhash National Institute of Sports 
45. MPE Masters in Physical Education 
46. BPE Bachelor in Physical Education 
47. CPSCP Cochin Port Sports Control Board 
48. DYES Department of Youth Empowerment & Sports 
49. BSB Bank Sports Board 
50. DPE Department of Public Enterprises 
51. MPT Mumbai Port Trust 
52. JNPT Jawahar Lal Nehru Port Trust 
53. IPA Indian Ports Association 
54. SCI Shipping Corporation of India 
55. AIPSSPB All India Public Sector Sports Promotion Board 
56. APB Sports Promotion Board 
57. PFC Power Finance Corporation 
58. HUPA Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation  
59. NHDC Narmada Hydroelectric Development Corporation 
60. DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
 
  

REPORT 
 
The Indian Companies Act, 2013 has been revised vide Ministry of Corporate Affairs’ 
Notification dated 27.02.2015 to include ‘Training to promote rural sports, Nationally recognized 
sports, Paralympics sports and Olympic Games, which would allow companies to spend on 
development of Sports from funds earmarked for Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) – related 
activities. Accordingly, various PSUs have been contributing to this Fund to augment the Funding 
of Sports/ Sportspersons in the Country. Accordingly, the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development selected the subject "Performance of 
National Sports Development Fund and Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons" and the 
Committee had already presented the Part I and Part II of its report (270th and 271st Report) on 
the said subject in both the Houses of Parliament on 13th August, 2015 and 22nd December, 2015 
respectively.  In furtherance to this objective, the Committee undertook a study visit to 
Thiruvananthapuram, Mumbai and Udaipur from 13th to 20th February, 2016 and subsequently a 
local visit was also held to the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, New Delhi on 14th June, 2016.  
Thereafter, the Committee also visited Chennai, Vishakhapatnam, Bhopal, Ujjain and Indore from 
27th June to 5th July, 2016 for the said purpose. 
2. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Department of 
Sports that no information is presently available with them regarding the spending by PSUs on 
Sports from CSR Funds as it is not mandated to keep such data. The Committee was also 
informed that after its previous visit the Ministry has written to all the PSUs, which attended the 
meeting during the visit, as a follow up and also to their parent Ministries to impress upon all 
PSUs under them to contribute towards sports under CSR. The Ministry has also taken up the 
matter with the Department of Public Enterprises to impress for the same. In so far as the 
promotion of rural sports was concerned, the Ministry informed that it is for the Banks/PSUs to 
decide as to how they want to promote rural sports or for the Department of Public Enterprises 
and the Department of Financial Services to issue instructions to Banks/PSUs for spending funds 
on promoting rural sports. However, the Department of Sports organize various games at block, 
District, State and National level to promote sports under Rajiv Gandhi Khel Abhiyan (RGKA).  
Against this background, the Committee undertook the study visits as depicted in succeeding 
paragraphs.  

(I) VISIT TO THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, MUMBAI AND UDAIPUR 
 
(A) THRUVANANTHAPURAM:- 
 
INTERACTION WITH LNCPE ALONG WITH SAI, MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS, 
DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS 
 
3. The Lakshmibai National College of Physical Education (LNCPE), Thiruvananthapuram is 
the premier institution under Sports Authority of India, established with the objective of 
producing quality physical education teachers and conduct research in the field of sports 
sciences.  The College has come into existence on 17th August, 1985 and is expanding in all the 
direction with the introduction of STC/COE besides the Bachelor's, Master's degree courses in 
Physical Education and a Research Centre too.  This Institution became a permanent site for 
conducting various State and National level coaching camps to make use of the vast 
infrastructure facilities sprawling over 50 acres of land.  At present, the college has developed 
multi-dimensionally in terms of course, training, infrastructure and students strength. 
Subsequently, SAI, Kerala was established and it started functioning since 2012. Its jurisdiction 
was further extended to cover the States of Tamil Nadu, Puducherry and UT of Lakshadweep. The 
representative of LNCPE submitted before the Committee that as per WHO, 1 out of 3 children in 
the world would have a life style disease and India would be having the largest youth population 
soon.  Kerala has good Human Development index including 100 percent Literacy, however, the 
scenario is not the same in Physical literacy and more work needs to be done including more 
Research in the field of sports.  The Committee was also informed that Kerala is the only State in 
the country, where Physical Education (PE) has been included in the academic curriculum.  The 
representative also submitted that the development of a child needs to be revisited to include 
intellectual (Education) and spiritual development in addition to physical competency of the 
child. 
 
4. The Committee also visited the sports college and was glad to see the maintenance and 
upkeep of the facilities.  The Committee appreciates the efforts and work done by the Principal 
and Regional Director for the development of the centre, providing facilities to sportspersons 
inspite of constraints of fund.  The Committee also interacted with sportspersons, coaches and 
other authorities and notes their need for various support in the form of better coaching, state of 
the art equipment, more dependence on sports medicine, better support services as well as 

better incentives like enhanced stipend etc. The Committee was very surprised to note that there 
has been no recruitment for the last 25 years despite the acute shortage of administrative staff in 
the Institute.  The Committee was also surprised to note that the STCs are run by Assistant 
Professors and not by suitable administrators.  Besides, there has been no career advancement 
for the employee for the last 20-25 years resulting in their lower morales. In view of the 
requirements for new sports infrastructure, the following new proposals are required to be 
expedited:- 
(a) Shifting and re-erection of Pre-fab shelter from National Village to LNCPE Trivandrum 
and SAI  Water Sports Centre, Alleppey  :   
 
5. The Government of Kerala, through GO No. G.O (Ms) No. 22/15/S&YA dated 4.6.2015, has 
been allotted 09 numbers of Pre-fabricated shelter,  single unit of size 9x7M with an area of 
63Sq. M and has 3 rooms and toilet blocks for SAI. They submitted that the expenditure on Pre-
fabricated shelter built on normal foundation comes to 100.00 lakhs.   
 
(b) Silver Jubilee Science Block -cum -Auditorium 
Owing to the expansion of the college, the available class rooms, laboratories, office rooms, staff 
rooms, etc in the present building, have become insufficient.  The college library has more than 
9500 books and is a major reference centre for the researchers, students, coaches and trainees in 
Sports and Physical Education of Kerala.  Due to the limited available space the library is not able 
to meet the demands for its use.  The Institute proposes to have a Science Block adjacent to the 
existing college building to accommodate more class rooms, Sports Science laboratories, seminar 
hall, auditorium and reference library.  The Committee came to know that there is a proposal to 
name the block as 'Silver Jubilee Block' in commemoration of the completion of 25 years of its 
existence of the College.  An estimate for 4035 lakhs has already been forwarded to SAI Head 
Office for obtaining administrative approval and expenditure sanction on 31.7.2014. 
 
(c) Halls for indoor training-cum-Competition  :   
One indoor hall is essential to meet the demands of training and competition in Volleyball, 
Taekwondo, Kabaddi, Wrestling, Basketball, Handball, Badminton as well as general training 
session for College students and STC/COE athletes.  It is also required for conducting National 
Camps in Basketball, Volleyball and Badminton.  Indoor training is mandatory, as this is a National 
professional college as well as a nodal institute under SAI.  Due to the lack of such facility the 
training of promising athletes is hindered intermittently since this part of the country receives 

wide spread monsoon for a period not less than six months in a year.  The estimate 1600 lakh 
for the construction of indoor halls was forwarded to SAI Head Office on 31.7.2014 for approval. 
 
(d) Astro-Turf Hockey Field  :   
In Kerala there is no artificial turf for Hockey. If an astro turf Hockey field is provided, it will be 
beneficial to the State as a whole.  Being a national institute for Physical Education and Sports, it 
is imperative to have all state of the art facilities.  Hockey is one of the major teaching disciplines 
for the students and the College also runs STC in Hockey.  An estimate for 400 lakhs for this 
work was forwarded to the Head Office on 15.1.2009 for approval. 
 
(e) Facility Centre to Athletics Stadium  :   
The LNCPE athletic stadium is intensively used by the elite sports persons and trainees of national 
academy.  Hence, a facility centre attached to the stadium with toilets, change room, medical 
room, dope centre, rest room etc. would be an added advantage.  It is otherwise also required 
for regular utilization of the new international standard synthetic athletic track especially during 
competitions.  The proposal to construct a facility centre was mooted vide this office letter dated 
8.2.2010 to SAI Head Office and an estimate for 198 lakhs submitted for approval. 
 
(f) Roofing the small area courts of SAI LNCPE  :   
The SAI LNCPE is having a complex of small area courts comprising the Basket ball courts, 
Volleyball Courts and Lawn Tennis courts.  Since this part of the country is having wide spread 
rainy season it is proposed to provide roof coverage to this complex, so that the training can be 
conducted without any hindrance.  This will also act as an open air auditorium.  The estimate for 
400 lakh has been submitted for approval exceeding this work. 
 
(g) Guest House for SAG Alappuzha  :   
The SAI SAG Alappuzha is located in an isolated island away from the Alapppuzha township.  
There is no proper accommodation available in the centre for national coaches and other senior 
officials visit in the centre.  The foreign coach appointed is also facing problem for getting 
suitable accommodation.  The representative added that it is proposed that a guest house may 
be constructed at SAG Alappuzha to meet the above demands.  The estimate for this work 
amounts to 250 lakh. 
  

 
(h) Synthetic Track for SAG Mayiaduthural  :   
The SAI SAG centre at Mayiaduthural has well developed sports infrastructure except a synthetic 
Athletic track.  Construction of an international Standard Synthetic Track at this centre would be 
beneficial to athletes, the estimated cost for which amounts to 900 lakh. 
(i) Synthetic track and Swimming pool at STC Puducherry  :   
During the visit of DG SAI at STC Puducherry on 8.9.2015, the state government has offered land 
for the construction of a synthetic track and a swimming pool for the state, which would cost 
1300 lakh approximately. 
(j) High Altitude training Centre 
Many of the national camps are being held at Ooty to have the advantages of high altitude.  But 
the non-availability of own accommodation and training facilities are the major hurdle. During 
the visit of DG, SAI to Tamil Nadu on 7th September, 2015, the State Government has offered all 
the support for establishing a high altitude training centre at Ooty.  
(k) ESTABLISHMENT MATTERS 
(i) Requirement of additional staff/Cadre structuring  
The institution has submitted a detailed proposal for the cadre restructuring and 
appointment of staff to meet the demands.  Even though SAI LNCPE is upgraded as Regional 
Centre of SAI with jurisdiction to states such as Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Pondicherry and UT of 
Lakshadweep, no additional staff has been deployed.  Hence the Institute has made a 
proposal connected with the cadre restructuring and appointment of additional staff. 
(ii) Purchase of an Ambulance  
The representatives added that it has become a great risk to attend injured athletes and 
players in the absence of an Ambulance.  It is very essential to lift the students and trainees 
to nearby hospital as soon as they fall ill or get injured.  The medical facility available in the 
college campus is not sufficient in certain cases to attend such patients.  It is very difficult to 
get suitable transport carriage especially during off hours for this purpose. It is advised to 
have an ambulance for this institution which would cost 3 lakhs approx.  
(l) The representative of LNCPE further informed the Committee of the following 
deficiencies which needs to be addressed at the earliest and if possible, with help from 
the Corporates/PSUs/PSBs:- 

  (i) Latest turf required for the Football field. 
 (ii) The athletic track was defective and needs to be re-laid. 
(iii) Cycle velodrome, which is the only one in Kerala, needs to be re-laid with wooden 
Track. 
 (iv) Imported Touch pads be required for the Swimming Pool. 
 (v) Basketball Court is outdated and needs to be renovated. 
 (vi) Roofing of Gymnastic Hall needs to be re-done. 
 
6. It was further informed that the support from Government at present is very less and 
from Corporate is negligible, which needs to be sensitised and augmented if Sports in the country 
needs to be improved.  The Committee, visualising the plight of affairs at LNCPE, recommends 
that SAI/Department of Sports should coordinate with major public/private sector bodies to 
adopt at least one sports discipline on a SAI/COE centres at LNCPE.  It would also be appreciated 
if initiates are taken so that assistance and support from the State Government of Kerala follow 
the suit. 
 PROPOSAL FOR CERTIFICATE COURSE IN INTEGRATED SPORTS MASSAGE 
 
7. The representative of LNCPE added that Massage is of immense value in sports.  Its 
importance has been recognized by all sporting powers.  Massage enhances performance and 
recovery from training and competition.  Massage can improve relaxation of the athlete or 
prepare the athlete for better performance through massage stimulation.  Medically supervised 
massage can help in the recovery from sports injuries.  When athletes are turning to illegitimate 
methods like doping to improve performance, sports massage offers a drug-free method of 
improving performance and recovering from injuries.  Also, this course would offer an exciting 
career opportunity for the youth.  
8. Trained sports masseurs are a rarity in India and this was acutely felt during the 
Commonwealth Games at New Delhi.  The Lakshmibai National College of Physical Education, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala under the aegis of the Sports Authority of India, Netaji Subhash 
National institute of Sports (NSNIS), Patiala proposes to train sports masseurs and masseuses 
with the support of Government Ayurveda college, Thiruvananthapuram and Kerala 
Kalariapayattu association. This certificate course in Integrated Sports Massage would provide 
training in sports massage integrating traditional Ayurveda, traditional Kalari treatment of Kerala 
and the modern system of Sports Medicine.  This will be essentially a hands-on training imparted 
over three months.  This course would equip trainees with knowledge and skills required for a 

professional masseur.  Once qualified, these sports masseurs and masseuses would find a world 
of opportunities opening up for them.  The courses are proposed to be conducted twice a year-
from August to October and January to March with a duration of 3 months each.   
9. The Committee came to know that there was an Internship Programme for MPE students. 
Further, it is proposed that two meritorious students of MPE final year from each sports science 
subject i.e. sports psychology, sports biomechanics, exercise physiology and Training 
methodology may kindly be granted internship at SAI regional centres with remuneration @ 
25,000/- p.m. at par with the remuneration prescribed by the UGC for contract faculty and also 
free board/lodging. This will enable SAI to build a strong cadre of sports scientists who will be 
able to give scientific back up to the sports training in various regions of the Country. 
10. It was further informed that increasing the scholarship in number and amount is 
inevitable.  The number of academic merit scholarships is THREE in each of BPE and MPE classes 
at present.  This may be increased to FIVE each and the value of the scholarship may be raised 
from 2000/- to 3000/= for BPE and from 2500/- to 3500/- for MPE per year.  Merit-cum-
means scholarship may also be introduced on the same line as merit scholarship. The 
scholarships will provide succour to those who have paucity of monetary resources and also 
motivate all students.  
11. LNCPE has introduced Food Subsidy and Sports Kit to their Students. Most of the students 
are from financially weaker sections and hence finding difficult to garner funds to pursue their 
studies at the college.  Some of them look for part-time employment at the expense of their 
study time.  Considering the foregoing reasons and spirally cost of food items, approval may be 
given to re-introduce the food subsidy @ 2000/- per month per student.  These were 200 
students for 2015-16 Academic year, may be increased up to 300 in future.   It is also proposed 
that 5000/- per student be sanctioned for providing sports kit to the College students.  This will 
definitely attract more competent sports loving candidates from all sections of the society and 
particularly from backward and downtrodden sections of the society (rural and tribal areas). 
Approximate amount for food subsidy/year (200*10*2000*) = 40,00,000 
Approximate amount for sports kit/year (200*5000)   = 10,00,000 
Total Subsidy/year          = 
50,00,000 
 

12. The representatives further added that a new Post graduate Diploma course in Sports Law 
and a new Post graduate Diploma course in Sports Law may be commenced at LNCPE. 
Considering the inflation, the Institute has proposed to make the revisions as follows: -. 
Head of Account Present Rate Proposal 
Boarding charges of STC trainees 175/- 250/- 
Boarding charges of COE Trainees 225/- 450/- 
Sports kit for STC 5000/- 8000/- 
Sports kit for CoE 6000/- 10000/- 
 
The Committee was also informed that Proportionate increase in Annual Maintenance Grant, 
which was fixed seven years back, also needs to be revised. 
DISCUSSION WITH BANKS AND PSUs 
COCHIN PORT TRUST 
13. The representatives of Cochin Port Trust submitted that Cochin Port Trust is a Major Port 
constituted under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 and is a statutory autonomous body under the 
Ministry of Shipping, Government of India.  Cochin Port has been going through a financial crisis 
during the last few years and was unable to make contribution to NSDF for promotion of sports. 
14. The Committee was, however, informed that Cochin Port Trust has provided employment 
support to individual players selected for National/international events.  The Cochin Port had 
been recruiting sportspersons from 1970 to 2004 in different disciplines like volleyball, football, 
athletics, shuttle badminton, etc.  The players have represented the country in various 
international events and brought several medals.  The Port is maintaining Premachandran Sports 
complex (Athletics), a football stadium, one volleyball court, one beach volleyball court, one 
indoor shuttle badminton court and one gymnasium.  The Port has also provided land for two 
'Community Sports Kendra' in the areas in proximity to the Port for sportsmen from the nearby 
villages.  The Port is also going ahead with construction of stadium in one of the Kendras.  The 
Cochin Port has a dedicated unit called Cochin Port Sports Control Board which regulates and 
promoted sports activities in line with the policies framed by All India Major Ports Sports Control 
Board.  Recruitments have been curtailed thereafter due to financial issues and orders of ban on 
recruitment issued by Government of India.  Even after this period, sports trainees are inducted 
and supported with stipend.  Sports activities of Cochin Port are being controlled by Cochin Port 

Sports Control Board, (CPSCB).  The CPSCB is a member of Major Ports Sports Control Board 
(MPSCB), which is funded by Indian Ports Association (IPA).  Cochin Port earmarks 10 lakhs per 
year for sports activities. 
Sl. No Description Amount ( ) 
1 Volleyball and Beach Volleyball 2,25,000 
2 Football 2,75,000 
3 Shuttle Badminton 1,50,000 
4 Athletics 75,000 
5 Cash Awards to medal winners 1,50,000 
6 Maintenance Expenses of Multi Gym and Ground 1,00,000 
7 Miscellaneous Expenditure 25,000 
     Total         10,00,000 
 
CANARA BANK 
 
15. The representatives of Canara Bank submitted that, since its inception, the Bank was 
encouraging the sports fraternity.  Canara Bank Sports Council at Head Office was set up in the 
year 1984 to monitor/encourage Sports in the Bank. The Sports Council at Head Office is 
responsible for growth of sports and sportspersons in the Bank.  The Bank is sponsoring Teams at 
Bangalore in 6 Disciplines viz Athletics (Women), Ball Badminton, Cricket, Hockey, Shuttle 
Badminton and Table Tennis. The Bank is promoting National Sports by way of identifying 
talented sportspersons throughout the Country in various disciplines and by following due 
procedure wherein sportspersons are recruited in the Bank under sports category. The Bank has 
so far recruited 77 sportspersons, out of which, presently 41 are active players in 6 disciplines; 
Athletes (4), Hockey (12), Cricket (16), Ball Badminton (3), Shuttle Badminton (3) and Table 
Tennis (3). 
16. The representative further added that some of them have participated in the National 
and International tournaments/events and represented out State/Country and brought laurels to 
the State/Country.  Few personalities' names are given below:- 
 Ms. Shantha Rangaswamy - Cricket (Ex-International and Arjuna Awardee) 
 Shri U. Vimal Kumar - Shuttle Badminton (Ex-International, Ex-Olympian, French Open and 
Dutch Open Winner, Present Coach of Ms. Saina Nehwal.  

 Shri Bharat Chetri- Hockey (Ex-International, Ex-Olympian, Asian Games-Silver Medal, 
Commonwealth Games- Silver medal and Junior World Cup- Gold Medal). 
 Shri B.K. Venkatesh Prasad - Cricket (Ex-International & Arjuna Awardee), (ICC-World Cup-
1996 &1999). 
 
 Shri Sunil B Joshi-Cricket ((Ex-International & Eklavya Award). 
 Smt. H.M. Jyothi- Athletics (International) (Asian Athletics-Bronze, 100 Mts & 
Commonwealth Games-Bronze 4x100 Mts Relay). 
17. They further submitted that apart from the Teams at Head Office, it was also sponsoring 
Teams at Circle level for the local/regional Inter Bank/Institutional Tournaments.  The 
performance is monitored by the respective Sports Council, nominated at the respective Circles.  
Every year the Bank has been sanctioning sports budget to the Six sponsored Teams at Head 
Office and to the Sports Council at Circles for propagating sports/sporting activities. Talented 
students in the age group between 15 to 21 years are taken under the scholarship scheme to 
represent out Bank's Team in various State/Inter-Bank Tournaments. 
15. The representative submitted that every year, approximately a budget of 30 lakhs is 
earmarked for sports activities.  The details of expenditure are as under: 
(in  
From To Amount Sanctioned  Amount Utilised 
1.4.2013 31.3.2014 25,00,000.00 21,60,450/- 
1.4.2014 31.3.2015 30,00,000.00 11,88,363/- 
1.4.2015 Till Date 30,00,000.00 5,50,260/- 
 
18. The representative submitted that total 77 sportspersons have been recruited as 
officers/clerks under sports quota till date.  Criteria for sports persons to be recruited under 
sports category are that the players should have represented at least State at the National level 
tournaments and Country at the International level tournaments. 
 Sub-Staff  - Passed in 10 th Standard but should not have passed 12th 
Standard. (Age 18-26 years) 
 SWO (Clerk) - Graduation from a recognized University and Compulsory Computer 
knowledge (Age 20 to 28 years) 
 Officer  - Graduation from a recognized University and Compulsory Computer 
knowledge (Age 20 to 30 years) 
 The representative submitted: 

Most of the talented sports persons, who have been recruited in the Bank are the products 
of DYES (Department of Youth Empowerment & Sports, Government of Karnataka) and 
Sports Authority of India, Schemes like, NSTC (National Sports Talent Contest) SAI, STC 
(Sports Authority of India, Sports Training Centre) and COE (Centre of Excellence) under 
the aegis of Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Government of India. 
Department of Sports is providing academics and training to talented sportspersons under 
various schemes and 05 female Athletes, 14 players of Bank Hockey team, 02 players of 
Shuttle Badminton team are the products of Sports Authority of India and Centre of 
Excellence, Bengaluru. 
The above schemes are implemented by the Department of Sports at the State/National 
level to search raw talent and provide them training and to see that the players come 
out successful in their respective sports and get good laurels for the State/Country. 
Scholarship Players who have talent are roped into the scheme and will be representing the 
Bank at the State/National level tournaments.  They will also be under going training 
under the guidance of the reputed and experienced players of the Bank. 
Bank also provides opportunities to players, who have talent, by allowing them to represent 
the Bank as guest players when its teams are in shortage of players. 
19. The representative further added that they have framed Recruitment Policy duly 
approved by Board of Director.  Indian Banks Association formed BSB (Bank Sports Board) to 
cater to the needs of sportspersons working in Banks.  Bank Sports Board framed policies with 
regard to facilities for sportspersons.  After the dissolution of Bank Sports Board in 2008, Banks 
had the discretion to frame their own policy.  But the Bank is following and practicing the 
guidelines framed by the erstwhile Bank Sports Board.  The details of the guidelines of the Bank 
Sports Board are as follows. 
 Special Leave: Whenever any sportsperson represents the Bank team in any tournament 
at the State/National level, they are provided with 75 days of special leave in a calendar 
year 
 Duty Leave: Whenever any sportsperson represents the State/Country in any 
tournament at the National/International level, they are provided with duty leave without 
any ceiling limit, including pre-participation coaching camps. 
 Time-off Facility: Whenever players of Bank teams are going to participate in any 
tournaments at State/National level, they are provided with additional time-off facility to 

have enough practice as per the tournaments scheduled. 
 Increments: Sportspersons who have achieved excellence in tournaments at 
National/International level will be eligible for increments for his/her performance.  One 
increment for excelling at the International level in a year.  The total number of 
increments to be awarded to an individual shall not exceed five in his/her entire career. 
 Special Leave Coaching: Players/Employees of the Bank, who take up coaching at 
District/State/Zone/Country level, for tournaments, including pre-participating coaching 
camps, are provided with 45 days of special leave in a calendar year. 
 Injuries: Whenever any player gets injured, he/she is permitted 100% medical 
reimbursement along with the treatment prescribed by the Doctor treating the injury.  
Depending upon the seriousness of the injury and medical certificate given by the Doctor 
necessary leave is also permitted. 
 County/Premier Leagues: Players are permitted to play in overseas professional 
league matches to get exposure to the conditions which in turn will help them in 
improving their game.  The Bank provides them Extra Ordinary Leave on Loss of Pay for a 
period not more than 02 years in their entire service career.  
 Out of Turn Promotion: Players are eligible for out of turn promotion, if they 
participate in highly rated International events like Olympic Games, World Cup 
Tournaments, Commonwealth Games, SAARC Games, SAF Games, Champion Trophy 
Tournaments and Cricket Test Series. At National Level, the player should have 
represented the State for Five years and should have two medal winning performance. 
 TA/HA: Bank provides TA/HA to the players who represent the Bank in the tournament at 
the State/National level.  Even, when players are representing the State teams TA/HA is 
provided by the Bank, subject to the condition that the State Association is not providing 
any facilities. 
 Scholarship: Talented young players between the ages of 18-21 years are enrolled in the 
scheme of scholarship formulated by the Bank.  As per the requirement of the teams 
scholarship players are provided to the teams. 
 Recruitment: As per the Recruitment policy approved by the Board of Directors. 
 Out of Pocket Expenses : Whenever players represents the Bank teams in 
tournaments at State level they are provided with OPE (Out of Pocket Expenses) to cater 
to their dietary supplements during the competitions. 
COCHIN SHIPYARD LIMITED 
20. The CMD of Cochin Shipyard Ltd. (CSL) submitted that since no specific directives 
have been received from the administrative Ministry regarding contribution to NSDF, no 
contribution has been made by CSL so far.  However, contribution to NSDF will be reviewed 
in consultation with and approval of Board and administrative Ministry. 
i. CSL sponsored two employees namely Shri Gregoreous PV and Smt. 
Sobanakumari for participating in the Asian Masters Athletics Championship 
held in Japan and France during the year 2014 and 2015 respectively. 
ii. Special leave is granted to employees to participate in 
District/State/National Level sports tournament.  Cochin Shipyard sponsored 

the Senior Football team of Kerala State to participate in the 2011 Santosh 
Trophy National Football tournament. 
iii. CSL has not adopted any individual sport/centre. 
iv. Sponsored Annual Inter College Football Tournament held at Malappuram 
District, Kerala and Spent 10 lakhs in the year 2014 and 5 lakh each in the 
year 2015 and 2016. 
v. Financial support had also been extended under CSR to the First T-20 Asia 
Cup Cricket for Blind and appreciation of the Series Winners organised by 
the Cricket Association for the Blind, Kozhikode, Kerala in January, 2016.  As 
a token of appreciation and encouragement, it has been decided to honour 
members of Indian team, which won the series, by awarding a cash prize of 
10000/- each in a befitting function at Cochin Shipyard Employees 
Recreation Club. 
21. During the period 2010-11 to 2015-16 CSL had supported the following sports 
related initiatives under CSR:- 
S.No. Name of the 
Scheme/Project 
Year Amount of fund 
allocation 
Name of the 
Organization / 
Person to whom 
the fund was 
released 
1 Support to Payipad 
Jalolsavam (Boat Race) 
in connection with 
Water Carnival during 
Onam Festival 
2010-11 70,000.00 Payipad 
Jalolsavam 
Samiti, Payipad, 
Kerala 
2 Support to Kochi 
Kavaratti-Kochi 
Offshore Sailing Race to 
promote adventurous 
and traditional water 
sports 
2010-11 2,00,000.00 Kerala Water 
Sports and 
Sailing 
Organization and 
Offshore Sailing 
Club of India 
(OSC), Cochin, 
Kerala 
3 Support to Kerala 
Senior Team for 
Santhosh Trophy 2010-
11 (National 
Championship) 
2011-12 8,00,000.00 Kerala Football 
Association, 
Ernakulam, 
Kerala 
4 Support to National 
Coastal Optimist 
Competition 2011 for 
promoting 
Adventurous Sports 
2011-12 10,00,000.00 Kerala Yachting 
Association in 
partnership with 
Ernakulam 
Sailing 

Association and 
Yachting 
Association of 
India, Ernakulam, 
Kerala 
5 Support to 73 rd 
National Table Tennis 
Championships for 
Cadets and Sub Juniors 
2011-12 1,00,000.00 Kerala Table 
Tennis 
Association, 
Ernakulam, 
Kerala 
6 Support for Santhosh 
Trophy and National 
Football Championship 
2013 in order to 
encourage and support 
Kerala Team 
2012-13 5,50,000.00 Kerala Football 
Association, 
Ernakulam, 
Kerala 
7 Support to First T-20 
Asia Cup Cricket for 
Blind appreciation of 
the Series Winners. 
2015-16 7,90,000.00 The Cricket 
Association for 
the Blind in 
Kerala, 
Kozhikode, 
Kerala 
 
Percentage on the funds earmarked for CSR spent on promotion of Sports by CSL is indicated in 
the table given below: 
Year Fund Alloted in  Percentage 
2010-11 270000 0.83% 
2011-12 1900000 5.43% 
2012-13 550000 1.83% 
2015-16 790000 1.26% 
 
22. The Committee was apprised that the CSL has not so far framed any specific sports policy.  
CSL had recruited sports persons in the year 1980 and six persons, who represented Kerala State 
in the item of Volley Ball and Body Building were appointed in the regular services of the 
company.  Further the Shipyard maintained a Volley Ball team until early 1990s and they had won 
a number of tournaments at both State and National Level.  Owing to age and other factors the 
members of volley ball team were retrained and redeployed in other jobs.  Cochin Shipyard had 
so far not received any specific instructions from Ministry of Shipping or Department of Public 
Enterprises regarding recruitment of Sportspersons.  However, if there are any guidelines issued 
by Government of India in this regard, applicable to CPSEs, these will be implemented in 

consultation with the Ministry of Shipping.  Company has so far not set up Sports Promotion 
Board.  Cochin Shipyard Employees Recreation Club is authorised to select teams to participate in 
District/State /National Level sports events and the selected employees are granted special leave 
for participating in such tournaments.  Expenses towards their travel/lodging and boarding are 
met by the company. 
23. Recruitment to Group C & D categories are done at local level by notifying the vacancies 
to the Employment Exchanges as per the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of 
Vacancies) Act, 1959.  Cochin Shipyard has adopted a recruitment policy for induction of 
tradesmen in the core competent areas of Shipbuilding and Ship repair and has reduced the  
intake of personnel at supportive and ministerial areas.  The Vacancies in core areas are notified 
and applications from meritorious sportspersons who meet the recruitment rules for various 
posts have not been received so far for consideration. In response to the initiatives taken up by 
CSL in the North Eastern Region, it was informed that at present, Shipyard has not established 
any interface with the sports-University being set up in North-East Region. 
FERTILIZERS AND CHEMICALS TRAVANCORE 
24. The representative of Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore (FACT) submitted that it has 
made no contribution towards NSDF as the company has been going through severe financial 
difficulties for the last many years.  The position is still continuing and several austerity measures 
have been adopted limiting expenditure in all areas, concentrating on maintaining operations of 
the plant. The Company had sponsored players for International events till 1990.  Financial 
assistance and special leave on case-to-case basis is still being extended.  FACT owns a football 
ground, basketball court indoor Badminton Court in which coaching, tournaments etc. are held.  
FACT has been in losses for many years and, therefore, there are no funds for CSR activities.  
However it had been in the forefront of promoting sports and games for several decades.  Sports 
personnel, who excelled in the State, National and International levels have been recruited in the 
past.  FACT Sports Control Board and Sports Association were set up for promoting the activities 
of Sports in the company.  FACT also used to sponsor employees for National/International 
sporting events.  However, FACT continues to extend support by granting special leave etc. 
25. Recruitments in the company are restricted to the minimum due to the adverse financial 
position being faced by the company.  As of now, there are no DPE guidelines on the matter of 

recruitment of sportspersons of sports quota. FACT Sports Policy was framed based on the 
guidelines of DPE issued in 1986 and they were following these policies.  Subsequently in view of 
the changing policies and economic scenario DPE has cancelled these guidelines in 1997.  FACT 
had recruited in the past, Sports personnel who excelled in sports in the State, National and 
International level especially in the sports of Basketball and Football.  Being a loss-making 
Company, it has constraints in expenditure for non-core areas. As of now, no DPE guidelines are 
there on the matter of recruitment of sportspersons of sports quota. Sportspersons recruited 
earlier have been absorbed into regular rolls of the Company and are occupying both managerial 
and non-managerial positions in various departments. Recent recruitments have been carried out 
only in limited critical posts and no sports quota was applicable in these recruitments. The 
Company was not involved in development and promotion of sports and recruitment of 
sportspersons from North East Region and tribal regions of the country and there is no interface 
with the sports university being set up in the North-East Region. However, as part of its initiatives 
for encouraging sports; set up the Seshasayee Memorial All India Trophy Shuttle Badminton 
Tournament and the Dr. P K Narayanaswamy Memorial All Kerala Table Tennis Tournament 
under the auspices of its Clubs, conducted annually with sponsorships from outside.   A Football 
Academy is run by the Sportspersons of FACT and FACT has been extending support by giving 
FACT's Ground for playing/coaching, etc free of cost.  
STATE BANK OF TRAVANCORE 
26. The representative of State Bank of Travancore informed that the Bank is maintaining two 
teams each for Cricket and Football for the last 50 years which had participated in almost all the 
All India/All Kerala tournaments to which their teams were invited.  The representative further 
added that Bank regularly conducts recruitment of Sports persons under sports quota towards 
replenishment of players, who periodically retire from their respective teams on account of 
age/injury etc. 
27. The Bank is having an exclusive Department headed by a sports officer to look after the 
sports matters of the Bank, which is controlled by a Sports Board headed by the General 
Manager.  As on date, Football Team have 23 employee players and the Cricket Team have 14 
employee players.  During the last 10 years, the Bank has recruited 25 sportspersons for the 
football team and 17 sports persons for the Cricket Team. 

 Educational Qualification 
 Sub Staff : SSC/SSLC/Matriculation or equivalent-should have represented at 
National level or Inter University level. 
 Officers :  Graduation in any discipline-should have represented the Country 
at International level. 
 Relaxation in upper age limit are as per Government of India guidelines. 
 All their present players are appointed in the clerical cadre. 
 
28. So far the Bank didn't contribute any funds to NSDF.  The Bank has made a budgetary 
provision for sports activities as a regular basis.  For the year 2015-16 a total Budget of 
56,00,000/- were earmarked for sports activities. The representative also added that Bank is 
acting as Lead Bank in three Districts viz. Alapppuzha, Kottayam and Pathanamthitta.  Sports 
events are held in almost all the Districts of Kerala, and participate in tournaments held in other 
States where they are invited.  The Bank does not have a separate sports activity scheme for area 
where they are acting as Lead Bank.  Periodical recruitment under sports quota are also done 
towards replenishment of players, who periodically retire from their respective teams on account 
of age/injury etc.  Recruitment is done by inviting applications from sports persons with the 
stipulated qualifications as advised by the Indian Bank Association. 
29. For the year 2015-16 the Bank proposes to recruit 5 sports persons in Football and 6 for 
the Cricket.  The Bank's team members are selected by the Kerala Football Association and Kerala 
Cricket Association to represent the State Team in the Santosh Trophy (football) and Ranji Trophy 
(Cricket).  The Bank policy on sports activities are on the basis of the instructions given by Indian 
Bank's Association/State Bank of India and Government of India.  The Bank has constituted a 
separate Sports Board in the year 1995 which is headed by the General Manager.  The Sports 
Board supervise the sports activities of the Bank by convening meeting once in a quarter to take 
appropriate decisions with a view to improve the performance of the teams/facilitate sports 
promotion.   
30. The Bank was adhering to the spirit of National Sports Policy 2001.  Organising and 
participating in tournaments/sponsorship of sports events, recruitment of sports persons in the 
team are their major efforts in developing and promotion of sports activities in the country.  
Football and Cricket are the prominent games in the State of Kerala and the Bank maintains fully 

equipped teams in these two games.  The Junior Football Team, which fully consists of 
School/College going children to whom they are providing regular coaching in the game. 
HINDUSTAN LIFECARE LIMITED (HLL) 
31. The CMD submitted that Hindustan Lifecare Limited (HLL) (formerly Hindustan Latex 
Limited (HLL), has always been encouraging sports and recreation activities of the employees and 
their family members.  All facilities are being given to employees interested in participating in 
District/State/National level sports competitions, including meeting of their expenses.  However, 
the Company has not made any contribution towards NSDF so far since it was not adequately 
familiar with the operations of NSDF and the requirement for contribution to NSDF for promotion 
of excellence in sports as well as broad-basing of sports.  The matter will be reviewed in 
consultation and with the approval of Administrative Ministry for making contribution to NSDF.  
The Company has been sponsoring individual players, who are participating in 
National/International events.   
32. The Company is carrying out CSR activities listed in Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 
2013. Out of various activities specified in Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2013, the Company 
identified promotion of healthcare, sanitation and education as focus areas for CSR activities.  
However, the Company has contributed for promotion of sports through CSR by providing sports 
materials (Footballs, Volleyballs, Cricket Balls, Cricket Stumps, Javelin, Discuss etc) in a school at 
Kanagala Village, Belgaum, Karnataka. 
33. Presently, the Company does not have a sports policy for promotion of sports.  The 
Company has also not carried out recruitment of any sportsperson in the immediate past.  
However, the Company has committed to frame a sports policy for promotion of sports and also 
recruitment of sportspersons with approval of the Administrative Ministry. The Committee was 
also informed the HLL is presently providing Water facility for the Trivandrum Golf Course by 
fixing a permanent water line so as to ensure a perennial supply of water. 
34. At present, there is no Sports Promotion Board in the Company.  On a specific query by 
the Committee, it was informed that Company has not carried out any recruitment of sports 
persons from north eastern and tribal regions.  However, Recruitment to Group C&D categories 
are being done by notifying the vacancies to the local Employment Exchanges.  Presently, the 
Company does not have any interface with the Sports University being set up in North-East 

region nor does it hold any tournaments.  However, the Company used to grant financial 
aid/sponsorships to organisations, which approach the Company for sponsorship/advertisements 
for organising sports tournaments. 
35. The representatives of Directorate of Sports and Youth Affairs, Government of Kerala, 
submitted that  
(i) 21 crores of their Budget goes to infrastructure development; 
(ii) 31 crores goes for providing training to Sportspersons by Kerala State Sports Council; 
and 
(iii) 2 crores for "Play for Fun and Games" provided by State Government. 
However, only 2.5 crores for Urban Sports Infrastructure development and 2 crores for Rajiv 
Gandhi Khel Abhiyan are the only contribution from the Government of India.  Hence, it was 
brought to this knowledge of the Committee that more support from the Central Government is 
required for the development of Sports in Kerala. 
(B) MUMBAI 
36. The Committee held discussions in Mumbai on 17th February, 2016 with the State 
Government of Maharashtra along with representatives of  PSBs, viz., Union Bank of India, 
Central Bank of India, Bank of India, IDBI Bank, Dena Bank, Bank of Maharashtra, HDFC Bank, Axis 
Bank, ICICI Bank; and PSUs like Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust, Mumbai Port Trust, Shipping 
Corporation of India, Mazagaon Docks Ltd. and  New India Assurance Co. Ltd  in the presence of 
authorities of Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Department of Sports on the Performance of 
NSDF, Promotion and Recruitment of Sportspersons in PSUs/PSBs. The review of Implementation 
of the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 270th Report by Central Customs 
(Central Board of Excise and Customs) Mumbai was not taken up as the written reply was already 
forwarded to the Secretariat.  
UNION BANK OF INDIA 
37. The CMD of Union Bank of India informed the Committee that the Bank recruited about 
200 sportspersons through sports quota in clerical positions and a few in Sub-staff cadre.  The 
Bank has also taken 44 players during 2014-15 and 42 during 2013-14 as stipendiary players.  The 
selection is based on the criteria such as Age, Educational and sports Qualifications and discipline.  
Recently, the Bank's Board has sanctioned 29 vacancies to be filled in the clerical cadre during FY 

2015-16, the process for which is going on.  The Bank has also written to the IBPS for conducting 
Common Recruitment Process for sportspersons.  The Bank 
IBA for formulating a common Sports Recruitment Policy for PSBs.
38. The Bank has not been a contributor to the NSDF in the past.  However, the Bank has 
been making contribution to sports by way of providing s
organizing sports events.  The sponsorships during the last 3 years are as 
Financial Year 
2012-13 
2013-14 
2014-15 
Total 
 
39. As a Staff Welfare measure, the Bank provides subsidy each year for encouraging sports 
and cultural activities to the Regional Offices including those having lead Bank responsibilities.  
For the FY 2013-14, an amount of 
having Lead District responsibilities, 
FY 2014-15 an amount of 10.10 lakh was approved for the purpose.  Besides, Bank has been 
providing sponsorships to various organiz
The Bank has regular teams in sports like Cricket, Hockey, Football, Kabaddi, etc
sportspersons, who participate in various N
been engaging talented players, in the age group of 16 to 21 years
colleges for various games like Cricket, Football, Hockey, Kabaddi etc on a monthly stipend of  
5000/-.  The idea is to provide financial support and nurture the
support to young players of the Bank's team.  They represent the Bank's team in various 
State/National level sports events.  Besides, the Bank has been providing Sponsorships to various 
organizations across the Country for or
the representative of the Bank that support shall be extended to NSDF.
DENA BANK 
40. The CMD of Dena Bank informed that for the past several decades, the Dena Bank has 
been encouraging sports and Sportspersons in the following manner:
i. Participating in championships/tournaments in various disciplines.
16, the process for which is going on.  The Bank has also written to the IBPS for conducting 
ocess for sportspersons.  The Bank has also taken up the matter with the 
IBA for formulating a common Sports Recruitment Policy for PSBs. 
The Bank has not been a contributor to the NSDF in the past.  However, the Bank has 
orts by way of providing sponsorships to various organizations for 
organizing sports events.  The sponsorships during the last 3 years are as follows: 
Amount (in ) 
22,57,300 
66,68,787 
86,06,000 
175,32,087 
As a Staff Welfare measure, the Bank provides subsidy each year for encouraging sports 
and cultural activities to the Regional Offices including those having lead Bank responsibilities.  
14, an amount of 8.70 lakh was approved for the purpose for the Regions 
having Lead District responsibilities, out of which, an amount of 8.13 lakh was utilized.  For the 
10.10 lakh was approved for the purpose.  Besides, Bank has been 
rious organizations across the Country for organizing sports events.  
The Bank has regular teams in sports like Cricket, Hockey, Football, Kabaddi, etc, which also have
, who participate in various National as well as International events.  The Bank has 
in the age group of 16 to 21 years, who are budding students of 
colleges for various games like Cricket, Football, Hockey, Kabaddi etc on a monthly stipend of  
.  The idea is to provide financial support and nurture their talents and also to provide 
support to young players of the Bank's team.  They represent the Bank's team in various 
State/National level sports events.  Besides, the Bank has been providing Sponsorships to various 
organizations across the Country for organizing sports events.  The Committee was assured
that support shall be extended to NSDF. 
The CMD of Dena Bank informed that for the past several decades, the Dena Bank has 
Sportspersons in the following manner: 
Participating in championships/tournaments in various disciplines. 
16, the process for which is going on.  The Bank has also written to the IBPS for conducting 
also taken up the matter with the 
The Bank has not been a contributor to the NSDF in the past.  However, the Bank has 
ponsorships to various organizations for 
 
As a Staff Welfare measure, the Bank provides subsidy each year for encouraging sports 
and cultural activities to the Regional Offices including those having lead Bank responsibilities.  
purpose for the Regions 
8.13 lakh was utilized.  For the 
10.10 lakh was approved for the purpose.  Besides, Bank has been 
ountry for organizing sports events.  
which also have 
nternational events.  The Bank has 
who are budding students of 
colleges for various games like Cricket, Football, Hockey, Kabaddi etc on a monthly stipend of  
ir talents and also to provide 
support to young players of the Bank's team.  They represent the Bank's team in various 
State/National level sports events.  Besides, the Bank has been providing Sponsorships to various 
ganizing sports events.  The Committee was assured by 
The CMD of Dena Bank informed that for the past several decades, the Dena Bank has 


ii. Providing jobs to Sportspersons by way of recruitment in various disciplines.
iii. Providing facilities like special leave, TA/DA etc for participation in 
iv. Arranging various Sports events and Sponsorship of Sports events. 
41. The Bank has been recruiting Sportspersons periodically so as to induct fresh talent and 
maintain the standards. The Bank also engages players on scholarship basis to provide
opportunity to participate in important tournaments so that they can graduate to the higher 
grades.  Shri Parthiv Patel, wicketkeeper, who has played for India, was engaged by the Bank as 
scholarship player in 2001-02. The Bank
participate in sporting events and the talented employees are also included in the teams.  
42. The Bank has teams in 5 disciplines viz. Table Tennis, Cricket, Football, Kabaddi and Body 
Building/Weightlifting.  Every year,
During the year 2014-15, 13.27 lakh has been incurred for development of sports. Besides, the 
Bank is paying stipend every year to the players taken up on scholarship basis for various 
disciplines. The Bank has been recruiting Sportspersons periodically. Since 1991, 27* 
Sportspersons have been the recruited.  Board of Director has given approval for fresh 
recruitment of 15 sportspersons. 
Category wise recruitment* is as under:
Cricket Football 
9 3 
 
43. As per the Bank's recruitment policy, the criteria/eligibility norms for selection are as 
under: 
i) Age: 
18 to 26 years for sub-staff cadre; 20 to 28 years for clerical cadre and 20 to 30 years for 
Officers' cadre. 
ii) Educational Qualification: 
For sub-staff-10th standard pass
For Clerical staff-Graduation 
For Officers-Graduation 
iii) Sports Qualification: 
Providing jobs to Sportspersons by way of recruitment in various disciplines.
Providing facilities like special leave, TA/DA etc for participation in tournament
Arranging various Sports events and Sponsorship of Sports events.  
The Bank has been recruiting Sportspersons periodically so as to induct fresh talent and 
maintain the standards. The Bank also engages players on scholarship basis to provide
opportunity to participate in important tournaments so that they can graduate to the higher 
keeper, who has played for India, was engaged by the Bank as 
he Bank also encourages its employees [general recruits] to 
participate in sporting events and the talented employees are also included in the teams.  
The Bank has teams in 5 disciplines viz. Table Tennis, Cricket, Football, Kabaddi and Body 
Building/Weightlifting.  Every year, need based expenses are being incurred for each discipline.
13.27 lakh has been incurred for development of sports. Besides, the 
Bank is paying stipend every year to the players taken up on scholarship basis for various 
The Bank has been recruiting Sportspersons periodically. Since 1991, 27* 
Sportspersons have been the recruited.  Board of Director has given approval for fresh 
is as under: 
Kabaddi Table Tennis Body building
3 6 6 
As per the Bank's recruitment policy, the criteria/eligibility norms for selection are as 
staff cadre; 20 to 28 years for clerical cadre and 20 to 30 years for 
standard pass 
Providing jobs to Sportspersons by way of recruitment in various disciplines. 
tournament 
The Bank has been recruiting Sportspersons periodically so as to induct fresh talent and 
maintain the standards. The Bank also engages players on scholarship basis to provide them an 
opportunity to participate in important tournaments so that they can graduate to the higher 
keeper, who has played for India, was engaged by the Bank as 
employees [general recruits] to 
participate in sporting events and the talented employees are also included in the teams.   
The Bank has teams in 5 disciplines viz. Table Tennis, Cricket, Football, Kabaddi and Body 
need based expenses are being incurred for each discipline. 
13.27 lakh has been incurred for development of sports. Besides, the 
Bank is paying stipend every year to the players taken up on scholarship basis for various 
The Bank has been recruiting Sportspersons periodically. Since 1991, 27* 
Sportspersons have been the recruited.  Board of Director has given approval for fresh 
Body building 
As per the Bank's recruitment policy, the criteria/eligibility norms for selection are as 
staff cadre; 20 to 28 years for clerical cadre and 20 to 30 years for 

 For sub-staff: 
Should have represented the District in a state level event or should have participated in an All 
India School event 
 For Clerical staff: 
Should have represented the State in a National event, or the 
distinction or University in an Inter
member of a Combined University team.
44. The Bank is promoting sports by way of taking budding athletics and providing them 
scholarship in various disciplines.  In the year 2015
scholarship basis in 4 sports category namely Cricket, Table Tennis, Kabaddi and Football, Stipend 
paid to these sports persons in approximately 
fund has been earmarked for NSDF. In the past, in the quest for giving a medal to the Country in 
the Olympics, the Bank adopted a promising swimmer {Ms. Lekha Kamath}, who was a bright 
prospect as a junior, in 2006-07 and gave her financial assistance of  
Bank has also been sponsoring sporting events so as to promote sports.  In the las
Bank has spent 53.74 lakh, notable among them is
Marathon October, 2013. 
45.  The Committee was also informed that the Bank 
approved by the Board, in order to ensure that matters relating to sports and cultural activities 
are administered in an efficient and effective manner. The Sports Policy lays down the guiding 
principles for administration of sports and cultural activities, which are carried out under the 
aegis of Dena Bank Sports Control Board.  The policy is largely based on the guidelines formulated 
by the erstwhile Banks' Sports Board.  The sports policy aims to help the Sportspers
in the Bank to give full expression to their skills and proficiencies, as also to harness their talent 
so that they can earn laurels for the Bank.  In terms of the sports policy, the following facilities 
are available to Sportspersons employed
 Out of turn promotion/increments for outstanding performance as per laid down 
criteria. 
 Time off for practice, subject to exigencies of work.
 On duty leave/special leave for participation in sports events representing the Bank 
/State/Country. 
Should have represented the District in a state level event or should have participated in an All 
Should have represented the State in a National event, or the District in State level event with 
ity in an Inter-University event with distinction or should have been a 
Combined University team. 
The Bank is promoting sports by way of taking budding athletics and providing them 
scholarship in various disciplines.  In the year 2015-16, the Bank has taken 68 players on 
scholarship basis in 4 sports category namely Cricket, Table Tennis, Kabaddi and Football, Stipend 
paid to these sports persons in approximately 33.00 lakh per annum.   Therefore, no separate 
F. In the past, in the quest for giving a medal to the Country in 
the Olympics, the Bank adopted a promising swimmer {Ms. Lekha Kamath}, who was a bright 
07 and gave her financial assistance of  1 lakh [including kit].The 
k has also been sponsoring sporting events so as to promote sports.  In the last few years, the 
.74 lakh, notable among them is 30.00 lakh spent in Vadodara Half 
The Committee was also informed that the Bank has put in place a Sports Policy, duly 
approved by the Board, in order to ensure that matters relating to sports and cultural activities 
are administered in an efficient and effective manner. The Sports Policy lays down the guiding 
ation of sports and cultural activities, which are carried out under the 
aegis of Dena Bank Sports Control Board.  The policy is largely based on the guidelines formulated 
by the erstwhile Banks' Sports Board.  The sports policy aims to help the Sportspers
in the Bank to give full expression to their skills and proficiencies, as also to harness their talent 
so that they can earn laurels for the Bank.  In terms of the sports policy, the following facilities 
are available to Sportspersons employed by the Bank: 
Out of turn promotion/increments for outstanding performance as per laid down 
Time off for practice, subject to exigencies of work. 
On duty leave/special leave for participation in sports events representing the Bank 
Should have represented the District in a state level event or should have participated in an All 
istrict in State level event with 
should have been a 
The Bank is promoting sports by way of taking budding athletics and providing them 
he Bank has taken 68 players on 
scholarship basis in 4 sports category namely Cricket, Table Tennis, Kabaddi and Football, Stipend 
33.00 lakh per annum.   Therefore, no separate 
F. In the past, in the quest for giving a medal to the Country in 
the Olympics, the Bank adopted a promising swimmer {Ms. Lekha Kamath}, who was a bright 
1 lakh [including kit].The 
t few years, the 
30.00 lakh spent in Vadodara Half 
has put in place a Sports Policy, duly 
approved by the Board, in order to ensure that matters relating to sports and cultural activities 
are administered in an efficient and effective manner. The Sports Policy lays down the guiding 
ation of sports and cultural activities, which are carried out under the 
aegis of Dena Bank Sports Control Board.  The policy is largely based on the guidelines formulated 
by the erstwhile Banks' Sports Board.  The sports policy aims to help the Sportspersons employed 
in the Bank to give full expression to their skills and proficiencies, as also to harness their talent 
so that they can earn laurels for the Bank.  In terms of the sports policy, the following facilities 
Out of turn promotion/increments for outstanding performance as per laid down 
On duty leave/special leave for participation in sports events representing the Bank 

 Special leave up to 30 days in a calendar year for duty as sports official.
 TA/DA for participation in sports events.
 
46.   During interaction with the Committee, it was informed that the Bank is willing to 
support/sponsor talented/promising sportspersons. However, no proposal was received by them 
from SAI. In response, SAI Officials informed that the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Spor
already written to Department of Financial Services.  
give specific proposal to the Bank and not just a general routine communication, which would 
lose its importance. The Committee should be apprised of the
BANK OF MAHARASHTRA 
47. The CMD of Bank of Maharashtra informed the Committee that the Bank has a Sports 
Board, which was formed in 2011 to examine the expenses of the Sports Clubs, which are present 
in all zones. The Bank had many National players 
addition, the Bank also sanctioned Sports Budget every year. The Bank has incre
allocation from 11.00 lakh in 2013
that though there is a recruitment policy for sportsperson in the Bank, based on the guidelines 
issued by the Govt. of India and Banks’ Sports Board, however, no recruitment of sportsperson 
was done for the last 20 years. The Bank has informed that it has contributed 
NSDF. The Bank also further submitted that it is more involved with the indigenous Sports.
48. Besides, the Bank has taken the following steps to promote the National sports and 
recruitment of sportspersons in their 
 Bank is granting Duty Leave to the sportspersons for participating in various sports 
events at State, National and International level.
 Reimbursement of travelling expenses and payment of Diem allowances is made to 
them whenever they are participating in sports tournaments.
 Sportspersons are provided with kits wherever necessary for the related sports.
 Sportspersons are being extended relaxed working hours and Duty Leave for pre
tournament practice. 
 Bank has established Zonal Sports Committees at each Zone which takes care of 
sports activity in the Zones.  In addition to that, Bank has established Sports Control 
Board at apex level. 
 Inter-zone tournaments for various sports are conducted every year.
 Bank is also engaging sportspersons in the age group of 18 to 21 years on monthly
scholarship basis.  Presently, 
Special leave up to 30 days in a calendar year for duty as sports official. 
TA/DA for participation in sports events. 
interaction with the Committee, it was informed that the Bank is willing to 
support/sponsor talented/promising sportspersons. However, no proposal was received by them 
from SAI. In response, SAI Officials informed that the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Spor
already written to Department of Financial Services.  The Committee, therefore, directed SAI to 
give specific proposal to the Bank and not just a general routine communication, which would 
The Committee should be apprised of the same. 
The CMD of Bank of Maharashtra informed the Committee that the Bank has a Sports 
Board, which was formed in 2011 to examine the expenses of the Sports Clubs, which are present 
in all zones. The Bank had many National players in Cricket, Kabbadi, Kho-Kho, Gymnastics etc. In 
addition, the Bank also sanctioned Sports Budget every year. The Bank has increased the budget 
11.00 lakh in 2013-14 to 14.89 lakh in 2015-16. The Committee was informed 
s a recruitment policy for sportsperson in the Bank, based on the guidelines 
issued by the Govt. of India and Banks’ Sports Board, however, no recruitment of sportsperson 
was done for the last 20 years. The Bank has informed that it has contributed 10.00 
NSDF. The Bank also further submitted that it is more involved with the indigenous Sports.
the Bank has taken the following steps to promote the National sports and 
their Bank: 
Leave to the sportspersons for participating in various sports 
events at State, National and International level. 
Reimbursement of travelling expenses and payment of Diem allowances is made to 
them whenever they are participating in sports tournaments. 
rtspersons are provided with kits wherever necessary for the related sports.
Sportspersons are being extended relaxed working hours and Duty Leave for pre
Bank has established Zonal Sports Committees at each Zone which takes care of 
orts activity in the Zones.  In addition to that, Bank has established Sports Control 
zone tournaments for various sports are conducted every year. 
Bank is also engaging sportspersons in the age group of 18 to 21 years on monthly
scholarship basis.  Presently, the Bank has engaged 20 sportspersons on scholarship 
interaction with the Committee, it was informed that the Bank is willing to 
support/sponsor talented/promising sportspersons. However, no proposal was received by them 
from SAI. In response, SAI Officials informed that the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports has 
The Committee, therefore, directed SAI to 
give specific proposal to the Bank and not just a general routine communication, which would 
The CMD of Bank of Maharashtra informed the Committee that the Bank has a Sports 
Board, which was formed in 2011 to examine the expenses of the Sports Clubs, which are present 
Kho, Gymnastics etc. In 
ased the budget 
16. The Committee was informed 
s a recruitment policy for sportsperson in the Bank, based on the guidelines 
issued by the Govt. of India and Banks’ Sports Board, however, no recruitment of sportsperson 
10.00 lakh to the 
NSDF. The Bank also further submitted that it is more involved with the indigenous Sports. 
the Bank has taken the following steps to promote the National sports and 
Leave to the sportspersons for participating in various sports 
Reimbursement of travelling expenses and payment of Diem allowances is made to 
rtspersons are provided with kits wherever necessary for the related sports. 
Sportspersons are being extended relaxed working hours and Duty Leave for pre-
Bank has established Zonal Sports Committees at each Zone which takes care of 
orts activity in the Zones.  In addition to that, Bank has established Sports Control 
Bank is also engaging sportspersons in the age group of 18 to 21 years on monthly 
engaged 20 sportspersons on scholarship 

basis.  They are being paid monthly stipend of 
insured for 2.00 lakh against accidental injury.
 Out of turn increments were granted to a
National events and out of turn promotion was given to the sportspersons for 
representing India in International Events.
The Bank, however, informed the Committee that since 2003, no contributions are being made
by it to the NSDF but it committed that it will be done soon.
BANK OF INDIA 
49. The E.D. of Bank of India informed the Committee that the bank has recruited more than 
100 sportspersons in the past, who have represented in State/National or, International 
tournaments in various sports activities viz. Cricket, Football Kabbadi, Carrom, Kho
Badminton etc. For promoting sports activities, the Bank has been conducting various 
tournaments on All India basis in different streams every year. 
50. The Bank has over the years
in Cricket, Table Tennis and Chess.  The appointment of State level players was made at 
clerical/sub ordinate cadre and national level players were appointed as 
not made contribution to NSDF. The 
responsibilities as of now.  However, the bank has sponsored various sports 
organizations/associations/clubs to the tune of 
during FY 2015-16. The Bank has also committed that it will be making special provisions for 
making contribution to the NSDF as well as for sponsoring young Sportspersons too.
CENTRAL BANK OF INDIA 
51.  The E.D. of Central Bank of India informed the Committee that the Bank is proactive in 
promoting sports activity in the Bank. 
concession/ Time off, Duty/ 
tournaments/matches/events etc. to members of staff for sports including trekking/
Mountaineering, etc through a well defined guidelines.
Promotion Policy for Officers and awarding Staff for out
performance meets with certain criteria as laid down thereat
2nd out-of-turn promotion in case of exemplary sports performance in the recognized sports 
activities.  With an objective to promote sports in a pr
basis.  They are being paid monthly stipend of 6000/-p.m and they are also been 
2.00 lakh against accidental injury. 
Out of turn increments were granted to around 115 sportspersons for participation in 
National events and out of turn promotion was given to the sportspersons for 
representing India in International Events. 
The Bank, however, informed the Committee that since 2003, no contributions are being made
by it to the NSDF but it committed that it will be done soon. 
The E.D. of Bank of India informed the Committee that the bank has recruited more than 
100 sportspersons in the past, who have represented in State/National or, International 
tournaments in various sports activities viz. Cricket, Football Kabbadi, Carrom, Kho
Badminton etc. For promoting sports activities, the Bank has been conducting various 
tournaments on All India basis in different streams every year.   
s recruited 29 sportsperson in various cadres.  They have been 
in Cricket, Table Tennis and Chess.  The appointment of State level players was made at 
clerical/sub ordinate cadre and national level players were appointed as officers. The Bank has 
The Bank, being a relatively new bank, does not have lead Bank 
responsibilities as of now.  However, the bank has sponsored various sports 
organizations/associations/clubs to the tune of 80,000/- during FY 2014-15 and 
16. The Bank has also committed that it will be making special provisions for 
making contribution to the NSDF as well as for sponsoring young Sportspersons too.
E.D. of Central Bank of India informed the Committee that the Bank is proactive in 
promoting sports activity in the Bank. The Bank has extended various facilities like Duty 
 Special leave, permission to participate in various 
urnaments/matches/events etc. to members of staff for sports including trekking/
Mountaineering, etc through a well defined guidelines.   Furthermore, there are provisions in the 
Promotion Policy for Officers and awarding Staff for out-of turn promotion if
n criteria as laid down thereat.  There are guidelines for allowing 
turn promotion in case of exemplary sports performance in the recognized sports 
activities.  With an objective to promote sports in a professional manner, in the Bank's 
p.m and they are also been 
round 115 sportspersons for participation in 
National events and out of turn promotion was given to the sportspersons for 
The Bank, however, informed the Committee that since 2003, no contributions are being made 
The E.D. of Bank of India informed the Committee that the bank has recruited more than 
100 sportspersons in the past, who have represented in State/National or, International level 
tournaments in various sports activities viz. Cricket, Football Kabbadi, Carrom, Kho-Kho, Athletics, 
Badminton etc. For promoting sports activities, the Bank has been conducting various 
recruited 29 sportsperson in various cadres.  They have been 
in Cricket, Table Tennis and Chess.  The appointment of State level players was made at 
officers. The Bank has 
Bank, being a relatively new bank, does not have lead Bank 
responsibilities as of now.  However, the bank has sponsored various sports 
15 and 11.85 lakh 
16. The Bank has also committed that it will be making special provisions for 
making contribution to the NSDF as well as for sponsoring young Sportspersons too. 
E.D. of Central Bank of India informed the Committee that the Bank is proactive in 
he Bank has extended various facilities like Duty 
Special leave, permission to participate in various 
urnaments/matches/events etc. to members of staff for sports including trekking/ 
Furthermore, there are provisions in the 
of turn promotion if the sports 
.  There are guidelines for allowing 
turn promotion in case of exemplary sports performance in the recognized sports 
ofessional manner, in the Bank's 


Recruitment Policy, a separate chapter has been dedicated prescribing the rules for recruitment 
of outstanding sportspersons in Office/Clerical/Sub
52.  The intention and the commitment of the Bank in eventual
from outside job market are amply exhibited by envisaging a separate chap
Policy. On a specific query by the Committee, the representative of the Bank informed that at 
present no contributions are being ma
sports in a big way through its own team in the discipline of Cricket, Football, Hockey, Kabaddi 
and Volley Ball.  The Central Bank of India has submitted that it has recruited 209 sportspersons 
in various disciplines, viz.  Hockey, Cricket, Football, Kabaddi, Volleyball, Athletics, Table
Chess, Swimming, Carrom, Badminton, etc
budget to its zones for sponsoring rural sports/competitions in vario
IDBI BANK 
53.  The CMD of IDBI Bank informed the Committee that the IDBI has been recruiting 
outstanding sportspersons since 1977
viz. Cricket, Football, Table Tennis, Ka
encourages employees to participate in sports activities.  The Bank has been conducting sporting 
activities such as cricket, football, badminton and athletic tournaments. The Bank also 
encourages wards of employees who participate in University, State/National or International 
level sports events by awarding Sports Scholarship every year amounting to 
and 25,000/- respectively.  An amount of 
FY 2014-15 and the same allocation has been retained for FY 2015
Welfare Activities. 
 A summary of funds allocated by the Bank towards the aforesaid is given below:
Amt. (in  lakh) 
Allocation towards Promotion of Sports
 2011-2012 
Sports Activities 5 
Sports 
Scholarship 
3 
 
 
  
Recruitment Policy, a separate chapter has been dedicated prescribing the rules for recruitment 
of outstanding sportspersons in Office/Clerical/Sub-staff cadres. 
The intention and the commitment of the Bank in eventual recruitment of sportsperson 
from outside job market are amply exhibited by envisaging a separate chapter in the Recruitment 
On a specific query by the Committee, the representative of the Bank informed that at 
present no contributions are being made to the NSDF by it as the Bank has been promoting 
sports in a big way through its own team in the discipline of Cricket, Football, Hockey, Kabaddi 
and Volley Ball.  The Central Bank of India has submitted that it has recruited 209 sportspersons 
s disciplines, viz.  Hockey, Cricket, Football, Kabaddi, Volleyball, Athletics, Table
Chess, Swimming, Carrom, Badminton, etc. in the past.  Further, the Bank regularly allocates 
budget to its zones for sponsoring rural sports/competitions in various parts of the Country.
The CMD of IDBI Bank informed the Committee that the IDBI has been recruiting 
outstanding sportspersons since 1977-78 in Officers/Class-III /Class-IV cadre from various sports 
viz. Cricket, Football, Table Tennis, Kabbadi and Chess.  IDBI Bank actively promotes and 
encourages employees to participate in sports activities.  The Bank has been conducting sporting 
activities such as cricket, football, badminton and athletic tournaments. The Bank also 
mployees who participate in University, State/National or International 
level sports events by awarding Sports Scholarship every year amounting to 10,000/
respectively.  An amount of 5 lakh was allocated towards Sports Scholarsh
15 and the same allocation has been retained for FY 2015-16 within the ambit of Staff 
A summary of funds allocated by the Bank towards the aforesaid is given below:
Allocation towards Promotion of Sports 
2012-2013 2013-2014 2014-2015 
10 10 15 
3 3 5 
Recruitment Policy, a separate chapter has been dedicated prescribing the rules for recruitment 
recruitment of sportsperson 
ter in the Recruitment 
On a specific query by the Committee, the representative of the Bank informed that at 
de to the NSDF by it as the Bank has been promoting 
sports in a big way through its own team in the discipline of Cricket, Football, Hockey, Kabaddi 
and Volley Ball.  The Central Bank of India has submitted that it has recruited 209 sportspersons 
s disciplines, viz.  Hockey, Cricket, Football, Kabaddi, Volleyball, Athletics, Table-Tennis, 
in the past.  Further, the Bank regularly allocates 
us parts of the Country. 
The CMD of IDBI Bank informed the Committee that the IDBI has been recruiting 
IV cadre from various sports 
bbadi and Chess.  IDBI Bank actively promotes and 
encourages employees to participate in sports activities.  The Bank has been conducting sporting 
activities such as cricket, football, badminton and athletic tournaments. The Bank also 
mployees who participate in University, State/National or International 
10,000/-, 15,000/- 
5 lakh was allocated towards Sports Scholarship for 
16 within the ambit of Staff 
A summary of funds allocated by the Bank towards the aforesaid is given below: 
2015-2016 
18 
5 


HDFC BANK 
54. The Deputy Managing Director of HDFC Bank informed the Committee that the Bank 
actively supports sport culture and multiple initiatives are taken to encourage sports and 
sportspersons.  This approach is inherent at the time of hiring, wherein due weightage is given to 
candidates having sports and cultural background.  This aspect is highlighted at the time of 
selection process and personal interview. The details of Bank involvement in promoting Sports 
culture within the organization are elaborated below: 
 Every Year the Bank earmarks funds for employees for participating in inter-corporate 
events.  The funds are used for training, Sports Kits and participation fees. 
Inter-city sports events are organized every year in the Bank to encourage employees to 
participate in sports such as Football, Cricket, Badminton, Chess, Lagori, Carrom etc.  Funds are 
earmarked separately for this.  
55. To a specific query by the Committee, the representative of the Bank informed that this is 
their first interaction with the Committee and at present no contributions are being made to the 
NSDF by it. However, they made a commitment that a new policy in this regard will be put in 
place soon. 
ICICI AND AXIS BANKS 
56.  ICICI Bank and AXIS Bank were represented by SGM and Group Executive before the 
Committee.  The Committee was informed by these private banks that this is their first 
interaction with the Committee and at present no contributions are being made to the NSDF by 
them.  However, they made a commitment that a new policy in this regard will be put in place 
soon.  The Committee accordingly requested both the Banks to contribute annually towards 
NSDF and also make an endeavor to adopt some of the sports/SAI sport centers for the 
development of sports in India. 

NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED
57.  The Director and General Manager of New India Assur
that they regularly promote various sporting events and activities at local, Organizational, State 
and National levels through sponsorships and tie
20,000 has been spent till date on various events viz.  Navodit Sangh Kabb
Carrom Welfare Tournament, Akhil Maharashtra Chess tournament for Blind, Deaf Football 
tournament, Mumbai Marathon, Cricket tournament, Davis Cup Tie World Cup India vs Czech 
Republic Cup, Special Olympics for Physically Challenged, Sp
people.  When enquired by the Committee, the representative of the Bank informed that at 
present no contributions are being made to the NSDF by them.  However, it was assured that the 
support would be given to NSDF and in
MUMBAI PORT TRUST 
58.  Mumbai Port Trust also has a Sports Council affiliated to Major Ports Sports Control 
Board (MPSCB) under the aegis of Indian Ports Association. The Annual amount of 
approx. is spent annually on sports activities. Mumbai Port Trust has extended financial 
assistance to the players in the past for participating in the 
World Senior Badminton Championship at Turkey, Masters World Weightlifting 
South Africa, etc. A scheme for recruitment of meritorious sportsmen in Mumbai Port Trust was 
approved by MPT Board in 1987 along the
The first batch of 20 sportsmen was recruited in 198
of meritorious sportsmen not exceeding 20 in a calendar year in the Class III and Class IV 
categories of entry posts, namely, Tally Clerk, Typist
Messenger Gr, II, Mazdoors, Master (Jr.), Hamal and Watchman in games/sports including 
Athletics, Badminton, Basket Ball, Cricket, Football, Hockey, Table Tennis, Volley Ball, Tennis, 
Weightlifting, Gymnastics, Judo, Rifle Shooting, Kabaddi, Kho
1988-89, in all 66 sportsmen have been recruited in MbPT. MPSCB has permitted engagement of 
sports trainees for participating in the games/tournament to fill shortages in team .The Board of 
Trustees, have recently accorded sanction for engagement of 56 Spo
remuneration as under: 
(1) Stipend = 10,000 per Trainee
MPANY LIMITED 
.  The Director and General Manager of New India Assurance Co. Ltd. Informed the Committee 
regularly promote various sporting events and activities at local, Organizational, State 
and National levels through sponsorships and tie-ups.  During the FY 2015-16 an amount 
20,000 has been spent till date on various events viz.  Navodit Sangh Kabbadi Tournament, 13
rom Welfare Tournament, Akhil Maharashtra Chess tournament for Blind, Deaf Football 
tournament, Mumbai Marathon, Cricket tournament, Davis Cup Tie World Cup India vs Czech 
Republic Cup, Special Olympics for Physically Challenged, Sports meet for differential
When enquired by the Committee, the representative of the Bank informed that at 
present no contributions are being made to the NSDF by them.  However, it was assured that the 
support would be given to NSDF and initiatives be taken for formulating sports policy.
Mumbai Port Trust also has a Sports Council affiliated to Major Ports Sports Control 
Board (MPSCB) under the aegis of Indian Ports Association. The Annual amount of 
s spent annually on sports activities. Mumbai Port Trust has extended financial 
assistance to the players in the past for participating in the International sporting events such as 
World Senior Badminton Championship at Turkey, Masters World Weightlifting Championship at 
etc. A scheme for recruitment of meritorious sportsmen in Mumbai Port Trust was 
along the lines that was available in the Government
The first batch of 20 sportsmen was recruited in 1988-89.  The scheme provides for recruitment 
of meritorious sportsmen not exceeding 20 in a calendar year in the Class III and Class IV 
categories of entry posts, namely, Tally Clerk, Typist-cum-Computer Clerk, Timekeeper, ‘B’ Scale, 
rs, Master (Jr.), Hamal and Watchman in games/sports including 
Athletics, Badminton, Basket Ball, Cricket, Football, Hockey, Table Tennis, Volley Ball, Tennis, 
Weightlifting, Gymnastics, Judo, Rifle Shooting, Kabaddi, Kho-Kho. In a period of 25 years from 
89, in all 66 sportsmen have been recruited in MbPT. MPSCB has permitted engagement of 
sports trainees for participating in the games/tournament to fill shortages in team .The Board of 
Trustees, have recently accorded sanction for engagement of 56 Sports Trainees on payment of 
10,000 per Trainee 
ance Co. Ltd. Informed the Committee 
regularly promote various sporting events and activities at local, Organizational, State 
16 an amount 15, 
adi Tournament, 13th 
rom Welfare Tournament, Akhil Maharashtra Chess tournament for Blind, Deaf Football 
tournament, Mumbai Marathon, Cricket tournament, Davis Cup Tie World Cup India vs Czech 
orts meet for differentially-abled 
When enquired by the Committee, the representative of the Bank informed that at 
present no contributions are being made to the NSDF by them.  However, it was assured that the 
itiatives be taken for formulating sports policy. 
Mumbai Port Trust also has a Sports Council affiliated to Major Ports Sports Control 
Board (MPSCB) under the aegis of Indian Ports Association. The Annual amount of 1 crore 
s spent annually on sports activities. Mumbai Port Trust has extended financial 
nternational sporting events such as 
Championship at 
etc. A scheme for recruitment of meritorious sportsmen in Mumbai Port Trust was 
lines that was available in the Government Services.  
89.  The scheme provides for recruitment 
of meritorious sportsmen not exceeding 20 in a calendar year in the Class III and Class IV 
Computer Clerk, Timekeeper, ‘B’ Scale, 
rs, Master (Jr.), Hamal and Watchman in games/sports including 
Athletics, Badminton, Basket Ball, Cricket, Football, Hockey, Table Tennis, Volley Ball, Tennis, 
Kho. In a period of 25 years from 
89, in all 66 sportsmen have been recruited in MbPT. MPSCB has permitted engagement of 
sports trainees for participating in the games/tournament to fill shortages in team .The Board of 
rts Trainees on payment of 


(2) Mediclaim + Accident Insurance Coverage  = 1 lakh 
(3) Kit expenses + Allowances = 10,000 
 
JAWAHAR LAL NEHRU PORT TRUST 
59. JNPT submitted that sports activities of all the Major Ports are controlled by Major Ports 
Sports Control Board under the administrative supervision of Indian Ports Association (IPA).  
Financial contribution is made every year by each Major Ports to the IPA for managing the affairs 
of the board.  Therefore, at present no contribution is made to the NSDF. Jawaharlal Nehru Pot 
Trust is Major Port under the Major Port Trust Act, 1963 and functioning under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Shipping.  So far, no proposal is received by JNPT.  In case 
SAI Centre desires to have such Centre at JNPT, the same will be considered for extension of 
grant and other facilities. The JNPT, is sending players to participate in the State level 
tournaments as well as National level tournaments apart from Major Ports Championship.  The 
Major Port Tournaments are held for various games i.e. cricket, Kabaddi, Chess, Athletics, 
Carrom, Football, Hockey, Tennis etc. and each individual port is hosting the tournament as per 
the calendar prepared by Major Ports Sports Control Board. So far JNPT recruited 16 sports 
apprenticeship in the year 1995 and thereafter no sports apprentices has been engaged and 
regularized by the JNPT.  As per the direction of the Ministry there are restrictions to fill the Class 
III and Class IV posts, therefore JNPT is engaging sports trainee from time to time.  JNPT Board, in 
its meeting held on 15th January, 2016, approved a proposal to engage 12  sports trainees for a 
period of 03 years on consolidated payment of 10,000-15,000 per month in the discipline of 
Kabbaddi, Badminton and Cricket.  Apart from this payment, they are being extended facilities 
such as kits, transport for participating in tournaments, medical, insurance etc. JNPT also hosted 
the cricket tournaments for the physically challenged person in the year 2014 as a social 
obligation. JNPT is also giving sponsorship advertisements to conduct various sports events. At 
present, there is no fixed percentage earmarked under CSR for promotion of sports.  JNPT in 
association with CIDCO is adapting 12 villages under the JNPT influenced area scheme where 
facilities such as sports ground, school etc are also proposed under CSR scheme. At present, 
there is no definite sports policy for promotion of sports adopted by JNPT.  However, as 
mentioned earlier, JNPT is sponsoring its player for various tournaments. 

60. As mentioned earlier JNPT is not PSU but it is Major port under the Major Port Trust Act, 
1963 and Autonomous Body under the Ministry of Shipping, Government of India. JNPT is follows 
various instructions and guidelines regarding recruitments of sportsman from time to time.  The 
category-wise jobs given to the sportsman are as under:  
1) Cricket - 08 nos. 
2) Kabaddi - 06 nos. 
3) Badminton - 02 nos. 
4) Sports Trainee Cricket at present - 02 nos. 
61.  The Major Ports Sports Control Board is registered body working under 
Administrative control of IPA.  The object of the board is  
1) To encourage, promote and develop Sports, Games and Cultural activities among the 
employees and their Children of the Major Ports. 
2) To organize and control inter-Major Ports competition in Games, Sports and Cultural 
activities. 
3) To arrange coaching camps for improving the standard of Games, Sports and Cultural 
activities. 
4) To arrange for participation in competitions at State, National and International levels in 
Games and Sports. 
5) To seek affiliation in all National Federations and arrange for representations of the Board 
in National Federations. 
6) To frame and adopt such rules and regulations as may be found necessary by the Board 
for carrying on the conduct of the Major Ports Tournaments. 
7) To do all such things as are incidental to or conducive to the attainment of the above 
objects or of any items. 
 
62. The present expenditure for the promotion of sports is 60 lakh per annum. Presently, 
JNPT Sports Council is carrying out various activities for the promotion of sports. At present there 
is a JNPT Sports Council which is carrying out various activities for the promotion of the sports.  
The Annual budget of 60 lakh is made for the promotion of sports which includes team 
expenditure (kit, TA/DA, nomination for various state/National level tournaments). 
63. The following measures are being taken for promotion of sports as per National Sports 
Policy, 2001: 
1) The sports days are being organized in the schools 
2) The physical Education is given as a part of curriculum and sports teachers are engaged. 
3) The formation of JNP Sports Council for promotion of sports among port employees 
4) The officers and staff clubs are equipped with modern sports equipments.  The clubs are 

conducting various sports tournaments. 
5) The sports ground is maintained in the Township for the employees and their families and 
local community. 
6) Cash awards are given to the employees, who gave meritorious performance in State or 
National level tournaments.  Special incentives are also being given to employees for their 
meritorious excellence in sports at State/National level as per the guidelines. 
7) The sufficient budget provision is made for promotion of sports. 
 
SHIPPING CORPORATION OF INDIA 
64. The CMD, Shipping Corporation of India informed that they have not made any 
contribution to NSDF.  SCI has not sponsored any individual player selected for International 
event or adopted any SAI Centre/event.  The CSR vision of SCI is to be a Corporate with its 
strategies, policies and actions aligned with wider social concerns through initiative in education, 
health, environment and socially relevant matters.  As per the CSR Policy of SCI, no funds are 
earmarked for CSR to be spent on promotion of sports.  Further, the Committee was apprised 
that in SCI, recruitment is being conducted for Group ‘A’ posts only, no recruitment is being 
conducted for Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts.  The SCI shall abide by the various instructions/guidelines 
pertaining to appointment of sportspersons as and when recruitment is conducted for Group ‘C’ 
and ‘D’ posts.  There is no Sports Promotion Board in SCI, presently.   
65. The Committee was also informed that though the SCI had incurred losses for the last two 
years, presently it is not in loss.  The Committee was assured that assistance shall be extended to 
SAI for promotion of sports in future. 
VISIT TO SAI STADIUM, KANDIVALLI, EAST MUMBAI 
 
66. The Committee visited SAI Stadium at Kandivalli, East Mumbai and made interactions with 
the authorities' on the infrastructure facilities for sportspersons and also interacted with 
sportspersons.  The Committee was disheartened to see the dilapidated conditions of the Centre, 
which otherwise was located in a picturesque environment near Mumbai.  The Committee noted 
many deficiencies in the infrastructure easily visible as well as the plan for renovation of the 
Boy's Hostel and Mess, which were in ruins. The Officials informed that the original walls and roof 
would be retained and a double storey building would be constructed in the existing style of 
architecture. The Committee also noted the scarcity of water in the Hockey Field there, as a 
result of which the artificial turf was becoming hard and not performing properly. 

67. The Committee also noted the requirement of indoor facilities which is the minimum 
requirement to achieve an all-weather training facility for the trainees.  Various deficiencies like 
re-carpeting of Kabaddi arena, renovation of Judo Hall, Boxing arena, Girls’ Hostel, staff quarters 
etc. were also noted.  The Committee also lauded the sportspersons from this centre for having 
brought so much achievement despite the conditions prevailing there.  The Committee also 
suggested the authorities to have an independent agency to carry out the Budget estimate for 
various construction works. The Committee was surprised to note that the facilities were in bad 
shape and lots of areas have been encroached and it was shocking to note that earlier the Hockey 
ground was given private people on rent by the earlier office bearer for activities other than 
sports purpose.  This allegation was made by several people during the visit and needs to be 
probed as to why this was done without even the knowledge of higher authorities of SAI or the 
Department of Sports. There is serious problem of encroachment. It was also alleged that prime 
land had been encroached by the builders in connivance with the Officers of the said Centre and 
the State Government.  The Committee expects the present Director to send a report about the 
allegations to the Committee through Ministry of Sports in this regard and also improve the 
condition prevailing in the Centre.  The Committee also noted the difficulties being faced by the  
Centre  on  two important counts:- 
(i) Acute shortage of funds given by the Centre. A copy of the Statement provided by SAI, 
Regional Centre, Mumbai indicating the future infrastructures and funds requirement is 
at ANNEXURE - I 
(ii) mobility to secure the lease agreement with the State Government for the area housing 
the Centre, despite a lot of efforts by them.  
68. The Central Board of Excise and Customs (Central Customs) Mumbai gave a written 
submission on the implementation of the recommendations contained in the 270th Reports of the 
Committee.  The CBEC submitted that this was not in accordance with the opinion of DoPT which 
is the nodal Department for forming policy in service matters which is informally applicable to all 
Central Government Ministries/Departments.  The DoPT had earlier opined on three occasions in 
the case of Smt. Anju Bobby George that out of turn promotion for outstanding sportsman as laid 
down vide as DP&T's OM dated 26/7/12 is effective prospectively and past cases are not entitled 
for out of turn promotion.  The DoPT further added that in view of the earlier opinion of DoPT, 

their comments have been solicited again in the light of the recommendation/directions of the 
Standing Committee.   
(C) UDAIPUR 
69. The representatives of SAI, Gandhinagar submitted that SAI Western Regional Centre was 
established on 29th August 1987 to implement the sports promotional schemes of SAI in the 
following States/UTs: 
1. Gujarat 
2. Maharashtra 
3. Goa 
4. Rajasthan 
5. UT Daman & Diu 
6. UT Dadra & Nagar Haveli  
 
70. The State Government of Gujarat handed over the Sports complex with 64 acres to SAI 
initially.  On 20th July 2010, the State Government of Gujarat took back over 7.5 acres out of the 
64 acres for the development of the Mahatma Mandir Project and allotted 7.5 acres in Sector 25, 
Gandhinagar with a commitment to construct a new Guest House, Swimming Pool Filtration plant 
and a portion of the boundary wall affected in the process. Due to the regular National Coaching 
Camps conducted for Para Athletes in the discipline of Athletics, Power Lifting, Table Tennis and 
Swimming, the Centre has been nominated as a "Nodal Centre" for the preparation of Para-
Athletics for Olympics Games at Rio (Brazil) August, - 2016. This land in Sector 25, Gandhinagar is 
proposed for Centre of Excellence for Differently-abled sportspersons.  PE prepared by CPWD for 
estimated amount of 50 crores has been submitted to Infra Division Head Office, New Delhi. 
vide SAI Notification dated 23.6.2015, Governing Body of SAI, in its 44th Meeting held on 
25.5.2015, had separated the SAI Centre situated in the State of Maharashtra, Goa and Union 
Territories of Daman, Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli from the jurisdiction of SAI Western Centre 
at Gandhinagar, Gujarat and hence presently only two State come under its jurisdiction viz., 
Gujarat and Rajasthan.  Other recent activities undertaken by the Centre are:- 
1 Upgradaton of Campus including increasing in height of compound wall:- 
Proposal is already submitted to SAI Head Office 
2 SAI Guest House : SAI Guest House completed by the State Government and RD's 
residence at first floor.  Now the Guest House is ready for Inauguration. 
3 Synthetic Tennis Courts with flood Light facilities. 
 

71. The representatives of SAI informed about the Duties and Responsibilities of the SAI 
Centre at Gandhinagar are as follows:- 
 To ensure successful conduct of National Coaching Camp for preparation of National 
Teams for various International competition including Olympic Games, Asian Games and 
Commonwealth Games. 
 To ensure effective implementation and coordination of schemes of SAI & MYA&S 
programs in 02 States. 
 To monitor the performance of coaches and trainees in order to nurture Sub-Junior and 
Junior Sports Talent systematically and scientifically for Excellence at National and 
International level. 
 Coordination with the State and National Sports Federations for development of Sports in 
the Region. 
 Conducting of Selection Trials, Competitions for fresh selection/weeding out of SAI 
Inmates. 
 Providing complete Scientific Support to the Scheme Trainees for Achieving Excellence. 
 To ensure maximum utilization of the facilities existing and also to ensure proper 
maintenance and operation of the facilities for organizing National level of competitions 
in various sports disciplines. 
 To conduct workshop/seminar for PETs of the State Education/Tribal Department for 
upgradation of their knowledge and technical aspects through eminent SAI Coaches.  
 
72. The representative added that 46th Governing Body of SAI has approved the starting of new 
STC centre at Vidhyadharnagar, Jaipur.  Accordingly, MoU has been signed between Regional 
Director and Chairman, Rajasthan State Sports Council on 27.8.2015.  The stadium (18 acres) 
which has readymade infrastructure facilities, was handed over to SAI on 14.12.2015.  The centre 
is being made operational shortly. 
 
 Multi-purpose Indoor Hall - Flooring and electrification work to be completed by the State 
Government 
 Accommodation - Pavilion Building with four halls (Big) available for accommodating 60 
inmates. 
 
73. National Coaching Camps under the Long Term Development Programme (LTDP) for 
preparation of sportspersons to represent the country in different International competitions like 
Olympics, Asian Games, Commonwealth Games etc. are held at this Centre and its units in 
western region. 
Logistics Provided to National Campers: 
 The centre has successfully conducted the National Coaching Camp for preparation of 
National Teams in various Sports Disciplines, for CWG, Asian Games, Olympics and 
various other International Competitions in India 

 The centre has provided best facilities of lodging and boarding Infrastructure and 
other logistics for the National Coaching Camps.  Complete medical, Physiotherapy 
and Scientific support and state of Art fitness centre, Steam and Sauna Bath 
 Sports Kit provided to all National Campers. 
 Medical tests are conducted on regular basis for National Campers on need basis. 
 Age verification tests are conducted as and when required. 
 
74. The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports submitted that the following PSUs had 
contributed to NSDF.:- 
(i) India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited committed 30 crores out of which 10 
crores have been released. 
(ii) Bank of Baroda has contributed 1 crore to NSDF 
(iii) Damodar Valley Corportion contributed 15 lakhs to NSDF for Deepika Kumari Athlete 
(Archery) under TOP scheme 
(iv) Bank of Maharashtra contributed 10 lakhs to NSDF 
(v) Oriental Insurance Company contributed 5.82 lakhs 
(vi) GAIL (Gas Authority of India Limited) has come forward to support, but specific 
proposal from them is awaited.  
 
A detailed Statement indicating all the contributions made to the NSDF since its inception is at 
ANNEXURE - II. 
75. The Committee directs that an updated accounts of the expenditure made from this 
fund should be provided to the Committee along with the performance and achievement  of 
the beneficiaries to whom this expenditure was incurred.  The Committee also strongly 
suggests that the Department of Sports should keep a record of the contributions made to the 
NSDF and also pursue with other PSBs/PSUs on keeping a database of their contributions. 
STATE BANK OF BIKANER AND JAIPUR 
76. The representative of the State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur (SBBJ) informed the 
Committee about the various activities undertaken by them for promotion of Sports, which 
include the following: -  
i) The Bank has one Volley ball and one Cricket team comprising International and 
National level players, who participate in various tournaments at State & National 
level tournaments. 

ii) One of the Volley Ball players is General Secretary of Federation of Volleyball 
Association of India and one Sports staff from Cricket stream is a well known 
famous pitch curator in the Country. 
iii) One of the senior officers recruited under sports quota, who retired in recent past, 
was an Ex-Olympian, Arjuna Awardee and Asiad Gold Medalist. He was again re-
employed in Bank on Contract basis. 
iv) The Bank also arranges / sponsors various sports events at National / Regional 
levels through its branches / Administrative offices. 
 
77. On the issue of funds earmarked for development of Sports, it was informed that every 
year a substantial fund is earmarked for the development of sports. This year about 10.00 lakh 
is earmarked for the development of sports in the Bank. Many sports events are being sponsored 
in the State under its publicity budget, a few of them are : 
a) Sponsoring the Sports Meet organized by Keshav Vidhya Peeth, Jamdoli, Jaipur. 
b) Contribution to Souvenir etc. for 46th Sharma Mathur State Level Cricket 
Tournament. 
c) Sponsoring 25th Inter Ward Cup of Jaipur organized by Jaipur District Cricket 
Association. 
78. The Bank has recruited more than 30 members under Sports quota in various streams. 
Presently, there are two teams of players, one of Volley Ball and another for Cricket which are 
represented by 30 International & National Players presently working in the Bank. The criterion 
for selection under Sports quota is as under: 
a) For Sub-Staff: Should have represented the District in a State level event or should 
have participated in an All India School event. 
b) For Clerical Staff : Should have represented the State in National event or the District 
in State Level event with distinction or his University in an Inter-University event with 
Distinction or if he was a member of the Combined Universities Team. 
c) For Supervising Staff: Should have represented the Country or won an Arjuna Award 
or represented the State with distinction for at least five years in continuation. 
 
The selection is based on the Sports qualification and the personnel interview. 
 
79. On the issue of contributions to the NSDF, the representative of the Bank submitted that it 
informed that it is taking care of the training needs and other sporting needs / requirements of the 
sportspersons as such there was no occasion for making any specific contributions to NSDF. 
However, this did not deter the Bank from honouring the noted sportspersons of the country for 

their excellent performances at the International levels as and when the occasion has demanded for 
the purpose. The representative, however, assured the Committee that PNB would tie up with the 
Ministry of Sports for contributions in the future. The representative, however, assured the 
Committee that PNB would tie up with the Ministry of Sports for contributions in the future. 
 
80. The Committee was also informed that Players of their teams are recruited in Sports Quota 
and are regular employee of the Bank. All expenses of Sports activities are borne by the Bank. In 
order to facilitate sports, team members are provided facilities like reimbursement of expenses on 
boarding, lodging etc. by the Bank. Many Sportspersons are also performing as Coaches / Referees 
& Team Selector at the National Level / State Level selection team. These sportspersons are 
sanctioned special leave for 30 days at any one instance with a maximum of 180 days in a calendar 
year. 
 
81. The Bank has a sports policy for the promotion of sports. Sportspersons recruited under 
sports quota will be given permission to participate in sports activities of National and 
International levels. Various tournaments are being held to promote sports in the area. Sports 
persons are given out of turn promotion in their cadre. Sports persons are exempted for some 
mandatory assignment like rural or Semi-urban posting as applicable for general cadre candidates 
etc. Bank provides the facility of special leave to sportsperson employees for participating in the 
tournaments in the recognized games held at National/International/State, including Junior 
National levels and Veteran Sportsperson tournaments to the extent of 30 days at any one instance 
and maximum 180 days in a calendar year with additional leave for foreign tours and coaching 
camps. Requests for special leave to attend selection trails/selection camps/coaching 
camps/physical training camps etc. held for selection of State/National teams are also considered. 
Employees, who officiate as Coaches, Managers, Selectors, Referees, Judges, and Umpires etc. in 
the Junior National / National / International level tournaments are also entitled to special leave. 
Active sportspersons are also given a reasonable time off for practice on the basis of 
recommendation letter issued by the Captain of the team and according to the nature of the game. 
Excellence in the performance is recognized and rewarded through promotion i.e. out-of-turn 
promotion.  
 
82. The representative of the Punjab National Bank submitted that for the promotion of 
Sports, it has established PNB Hockey Academy in September 2002 to promote National sport of 
Hockey.  The Bank has allocated separate budget for the Hockey Academy.  PNB Hockey Academy 

has two teams – Junior team of 25 players, in the age group of 14-18 and senior team of 25 
players, above 18 years of age as employees.  
Senior players are provided specialized training facility through professional coaches outsourced 
from SAI. Besides they get daily diet allowance, playing kits, dietitian, doctor, physiotherapist, 
travelling allowance (on tour), insurance coverage etc. 
 
83. The Committee was informed that the Bank allocates annual budget exclusively for the 
PNB Hockey Academy.  Since the previous meeting held with this Committee in November, 2015 , 
as follow up of the commitments made thereat by PNB for the financial year 2015-16, a total 
budget of 3.28 cr. has been allocated for promotion of the game of Hockey.  Out of this, a 
budget of 2.15 cr. has been allocated for senior hockey team and a budget of 1.13 cr. has been 
allocated for junior hockey team.  Against the above budget, an amount of 1.03 crore has been 
spent for Senior Hockey Team and 44.21 lakhs has been spent on Junior Team up to October, 
2015. Major components of senior hockey team budget are salary and establishment expenses, 
travelling allowance, playing kit & equipment for players, diet money and conveyance expenses, 
ground rent charges, medical expenses, insurance of players, incentives etc. On the other hand, 
major components of junior hockey team budget are mess charges, playing kit, stipend to 
players, medical expenses, transportation, insurance etc. 
84. The Bank is presently not making any contribution to the NSDF.  As regards recruitment 
policy of Sportspersons, the representative of PNB informed the Committee that the Bank has a 
recruitment policy for Sports persons since 2002. In terms of the said policy, Bank has so far 
recruited 38 sports persons as Hockey Players (Male) in clerical cadre. Out of 38, 25 are still 
playing for Sr. Hockey Team of the bank. Out of these 20 players, 05 have since been promoted 
to Officer Cadre and present strength of sports persons in clerical cadre is 15.  During the 
financial year 2015-16, the Bank has recruited 09 Hockey Players and proposes to recruit another 
08 in the year 2016-17. 
85. The Bank also releases notification for recruitment through National dailies besides 
uploading the same on the Bank’s website.  For wider circulation, window advertisement is also 
released in all India papers and in local dailies published from states like North East, Odisha and 
Madhya Pradesh etc.  so as to include representation from all regions including of North East 
Region and tribal regions. Besides PNB keep liaison and have interface with Sports University in 

the North East, for promotion of sports in the region, as and when it is set up. Presently, there 
are 4 players recruited from tribal areas in the senior hockey team. 
CRITERIA FOR SELECTION :- Candidates should be  active sports person and fit enough to 
take part in future tournaments.  Highlights of other criteria are as follows : 
 
Age 
Clerical Staff 
Officers Between 18 & 26 years. 
Min. Educational Qualifications 
 
Clerical Staff Standard X pass or equivalent. (against Graduation for normal 
recruitment) 
Officers Graduation. 
 
Sports Qualifications 
 
Clerical Staff Should have represented the State in a National event or the 
District in a State level event with distinction, or his University in 
an Inter-University event with distinction or should have been a 
member of the Combined Universities Team. 
 
Officers Should have represented the country or won an Arjuna Award or 
represented the State with distinction for at least five years 
consecutively. 
 
Category wise details: 
Sports Cadre No. In proposed recruitment process in 2016-17 
Hockey Clerical 20 08 
Officers 05 - 
Total  25 08 
 
 
BANK OF BARODA 
86. The representative of the Bank of Baroda, at the outset, informed the Committee that the 
Bank has contributed One Crore Rupee to the National Sports Development Fund in the month of 
December 2015 for use in athletic budget. Every year Bank allots grant upto 15/- lacs to Sports & 
Cultural Clubs functioning at various centres across the Country to carry out sports & cultural 
activities for the staff and their family members. 
 
Further, Bank is sponsoring various Sports Events across the Country, with a total outgo as under 
for the last -3- years: 
 
Financial Year Amount ( ) Lacs 

2013-14 66.50 
2014-15 75.00 
2015 (upto Dec.15) 24.82 
 
87. Apart from the above activities, the Bank is exploring formulation of a ‘Sports Promotion 
Policy’ for promotion of Sports activities in the Bank.  In areas where the Bank is Lead Bank, 
Sponsorship of various sports programs is taken up to promote Sports. 
In Rajasthan following events were sponsored by the Bank with a total outgo of1,31,000/-: 
 
Deaf Athlete Championship (2014-15), 
Rajasthan Cricket Championship for deaf in the year 2012-13 and 13-14, 
Volley ball championship, 
Deaf wrestling etc.  
Further, in UP and Uttarakhand, sponsorship in the following events were undertaken with a 
total outgo of2,77,000/-: 
Ultimate Uttarakhand Himalayan MTB Challenge, 
Sports Meet of ASPG, 
Volleyball, 
Football, 
Women boxing, 
Marathon etc. 
 The Bank has so far recruited 91- sportspersons under Sports Quota. 
With a view to encourage recruitment of outstanding sportspersons, the Bank proposes to re-
introduce it, in its Recruitment policy. 
 Presently 27 sportspersons are working in the Bank and the details are as under:   
Name of Sports No. of employees as on date 
Kabaddi 14 
Cricket 01 
Kho Kho 12 
     
ORIENTAL BANK OF COMMERCE 
88. The ED of the Oriental Bank of Commerce submitted that the Bank has been continuously 
striving towards promotion of sports and the Bank currently has one Cricket team and one 
Football team of its own which participate in various tournaments at different levels and the 
persons selected on sports quota in the past and other regular members are part of these teams. 

In the recent time, Bank has sponsored/donated for various sports events for promotion of 
sports activities some of which can be listed as under: 
 Sponsorship for organizing Maharaja Ranjit Singh Hockey Tournament for promotion of 
Hockey 
 Sponsorship for the organization of All India Archery Championship 
 Sponsorship for organizing Boat Rally in River Ganges at Varanasi 
 Sponsorship for organizing Subroto Cup International Football Tournament for promotion of 
Football 
 For the promotion of Tennis, the Bank sponsored Delhi Open Tennis Championship   
 Delhi Golf Club Junior Level Championship was sponsored by the Bank for the promotion of 
Golf 
 Sponsorship for promoting Fencing Sports Activity in association with Haryana State Fencing 
Association, Gurgaon 
 Sponsorship for T-20 World Cup Cricket Championship for the Deaf 
 Sponsorship for T-20 Cricket Tournament 
89. However, the ED admitted that the Bank has not earmarked any fund for the 
development of sports, though it has been contributing in various activities for promotion of 
sports through sponsorship, presenting sports gear, etc. Besides, CSR funds are also used for 
sponsorship/development of various sports. 
In the past, the Bank has recruited sportspersons as per details mentioned below: 
Sport Number of persons Remarks 
Cricket 1 Recruited on 08.11.1983 
Football 12 2 – Recruited in September, 1989 
2 – Recruited in July, 1991 
8 – Recruited in March, 1996 
 
90. The Bank contributed8,00,000 to the National Sports Development Fund till 2004-05. 
Since then, no contribution has been made to the National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) but 
the Bank is contributing a considerable amount to various activities for promotion of sports 
through sponsorship/donation etc. The amount contributed by Bank during the last few years is 
as follows:                                                                                         
  

  ( in Lacs) 
FY Amount contributed for promotion of sports  
2012-13 11.25 
2013-14 48.32 
2014-15 16.50 
2015-16 (till January 2016) 23.80   
91. The Bank is presently not a member of AIPSSB presently. On a specific query, it was 
submitted that the Bank does not have any separate policy for development of sports and 
recruitment of sportspersons from the North East and tribal regions as it does not have interface 
with the sports University being set up in the North-East region. 
IIFCL 
92. The CMD of IIFCL informed the Committee that in March 2015, IIFCL has entered into a 
MoU with, Department of Sports, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MYAS), Government of 
India and contributed an amount of 10 crore during FY2014-15 to the Target Olympic Podium 
(TOP) Scheme under National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) to create sporting Champions. 
Further, IIFCL has committed to contribute Rupees ten crore annually for FY 2015-16 and 
FY2016-17 towards the fund subject to utilization of the allocated assistance and CSR budget in 
the respective years.  On the issue of recruitment of Sportspersons in IIFCL, it was informed that 
IIFCL is a lean organization and it is in its nascent stage. Presently, it has only 84 Officers on its 
Pay Roll. As it is an officer based organization (Group ‘A’) with only one Group D employee, no 
sports quota has been identified in the organization.  It was further informed that IIFCL does not 
have a regular team comprising sportspersons of repute. However, the financial assistance of 
IIFCL provided under the TOP Scheme of NSDF under the Ministry of Youth and Sports Affairs 
covers facilities of International training, purchasing sports equipment, coaching, etc. to the 
Olympic level sportspersons.  
93. As regards the existence of Sports policy in the Organization, the Committee was informed 
that Clause VII of the CSR policy of IIFCL, duly approved by the Board of Directors, emphasizes 
on identifying projects for training to promote rural sports, nationally recognized sports, 
Paralympic Sports and Olympic sports.  
 
94. The CMD also submitted that apart from IIFCL’s contribution to the TOP Scheme of 
NSDF, which also provides for prize money for ranking tournaments of elite senior sportspersons, 
it also conducts tournaments/provide scholarships to Elite Junior sportspersons of the selected 
Olympic Sports under the TOP Scheme.  

 
ARAVALI  GYPSUM AND MINERAL INDIA LTD. 
 
95. The representative of FCI Aravali Gypsum and Mineral India Ltd. Informed the Committee 
that it is a Mini-ratna Company and the Government of India has granted the status of “Mini-ratna-
II” category to the company on 06.06.2011 vide letter no. 18018/2/2011-FCA. It was incorporated 
in 2003 and has 100% ownership by the Govt. of India with a net worth of 174.79 Crores. 
 
96. The representative of the Company submitted that it has distributed an amount of 2.03 
lakh towards sports scholarship from 2012-13 to 2014-15. for students up to class 12 of 
Government schools, who participated in District / State level Championship. It has also 
distributed sports material worth of 0.89 lakh to the Rajkiya Uchcha Madhyamic Vidyalaya Shree 
Mohangarh, Jaisalmer during 2013-14. Apart from that the Company undertook the following 
activities: 
 Sponsored State Level Kho-Kho Competition at cost of 3.50 lakh during 2009-10.  
 Sponsored State Level Athletics Competition at cost of 3.00 lakh during 2014-15. 
 Sponsored District Level open Volleyball Competition at cost of 0.20 lakh  during 
2013-14. 
97. On a specific query from the Committee, the representative informed that there has been no 
contribution made by the Company to the NSDF, neither is there any Sports policy or recruitment 
of Sportspersons mainly because of no communications being received by the Company in this 
regard. 
 
RAJASTHAN ENGINEERING AND INSTRUMENTATION LIMITED (REIL)   
 
98. The MD of Rajasthan Engineering and Instrumentation Limited (REIL) has been incurring 
losses since 1993, as such the company could not spend significant amount on sports and no 
amount could be contributed towards NSDF. Neither has it sponsored any individual player for 
International event nor has it adopted any SAI centre/event etc. REIL is providing infrastructure 
facilities for sports like Basket ball, Volley ball, Tennis, Cricket, Football, Table tennis, 
Badminton etc. Due to continuous losses, the provisions of the Companies Act 2013 relating to 
Corporate Social Responsibility are not applicable to the company. Being a sick industrial 
company, there has not been any recruitment during last more than 20 years in REIL Kota. 
However, REIL has constituted a Sports Council for promotion of sports in and around REIL 
vicinity.  
 

99. The representative of REIL submitted that the Company has not made any contributions to 
the NSDF as of now as it has not received any communications from the National Sports 
Development Fund so far, nor has the Company, in the perspective of its small profile, size, value 
of profits and amount of funds, has ever planned any large-scale sports promotion/activity.  
100. It was further informed that REIL has been contributing to the sponsorship of sports 
program of various government departments/institutions, as mentioned above. However it is yet to 
undertake promotion of sports through CSR. However, it was assured that further activities in 
promotion of sports activity under CSR will be undertaken after seeking approval of specific 
proposals from the CSR Committee of the REIL Board.  
101. Further, REIL has constituted a CSR Committee to undertake the CSR activities in 
accordance with the guidelines issued by the Government and various activities were undertaken 
in last three years.  
102 The Company has recently set up a Sports Promotion Committee and it also proposes to 
create a policy for promotion of sports, based on the guidelines of the DPE/DoPT/NSDF in this 
regard. However, there is presently no Sports Promotion Board. The present status of category-
wise jobs given to sportspersons is as mentioned below: 
 
Sl.  
No. 
Category of the Post  Name of the employee  Name of Sports / Level  
1 Group-A Sh.Neeraj Saxena Basket Ball / College  
2 Group-A Sh. Harish Yadav Volley Ball / National-NIT 
Athletics / College   
3 Group-A Ms. Sunita Kumar  Volley ball/National-NIT 
Athletics / College   
 
103. On a specific query on its activities in the North-Eastern and Tribal Regions, it was 
informed that presently REIL has not taken any specific steps in development and promotion of 
sports and recruitment of sportspersons from North East Region and tribal region of the country. 
However, REIL publishes its advertisement for the recruitment of employees at various levels, 
nationwide. In the advertisements, it is also mentioned that relaxation to the candidates shall be 
given as per Government guidelines. So, far none of the candidate belonging to sport’s eligibility 
criteria for recruitment has applied ever. It has been assured that henceforth, advertisements would 
specifically mention about relaxation for Sports Persons, as per the guidelines issued by DoPT. 

104. The Committee lauded the effort of IIFCL, Bank of Baroda and Oriental Insurance 
Co. Ltd.  for their contributions extended for promotion of sports and these Organizations 
will set a towering example for the benefit of the Sports in the Country as a whole. The 
Committee urges the other organizations to start looking into this aspect and go for 
contributing to this noble cause, which will ultimately contribute to making India a strong 
and confident Sporting Nation. The Committee also endorses the idea of sponsoring of 
deserving Sportspersons by Banks and PSUs or the adoption of a Sporting Centre, 
preferably in a rural or backward region of the Country, from where the unpolished raw 
talents would definitely arise. 
 
 105. The Committee, however, also noted the negligible contribution to Sports by some of 
the PSUs/PSBs, be it contribution to NSDF, recruitment of Sportspersons or even the existence 
of Sports policy in their organization. Many of the organizations have simply cited their internal 
sports activities or support given to their own employees for some sporting events. 
Recruitment of Sportspersons is negligible compared to the overall strength of their 
employees. The Committee hopes that with organizations such as IIFCL, Bank of Baroda, 
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. etc. coming forward and setting good examples, others would 
follows suit and make this venture a grand success and the goals of the Indian Sports 
achievable in the next few years. 
 
II.  LOCAL VISIT TO JAWAHAR LAL NEHRU STADIUM 
106. The Committee undertook a Local Study Visit to the Jawaharlal Nehru Sports Complex, 
Lodhi Road, New Delhi to discuss with the representatives of Gas Authority of India Ltd. (GAIL), 
National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC), PGC, Food Corporation of India Ltd. (IFCI), PFC, 
NBCC, Concor, Steel Authority of India Ltd (SAIL), HUDCO and MMTC on the issue of the 
Performance of NSDF, Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons in PSUs and also to assess 
the promotion of sports, development and maintenance of Sports infrastructure there.  The 
Committee also interacted with sportspersons and Coaches during the said visit.  
107. The Department of Sports apprised the Committee of the latest position in the 
preparation of the Olympics National team and various assistance provided to the athletes for 
training, competition explore, equipment, pocket money, support person etc.  The Committee 
was informed that the Department has already spent around 15 crores for the said purpose and 
it has identified 9 high priority disciplines namely Hockey, Shooting, Tennis, Wrestling, Boxing, 

Archery, Athletics, Badminton and Weighlifting with an expenditure budget of 2 crores per year 
per sport. 
108. The Secretary, Department of Sports submitted that the role of the Department of Sports 
is to create the infrastructure and promote capacity building for broad-basing sports as well as 
for achieving excellence in various International and National competitive events.  The schemes 
being implemented by the Department are geared towards achieving these objectives.  Keeping 
in view the growing demands for advanced infrastructure, equipment and scientific support the 
Department of Sports has taken several initiatives and is providing the necessary assistance to 
sportspersons by way of training and exposure in international competitions backed up with 
scientific and equipment support as well as cash incentives for boosting their morale. The 
representatives further added that there was the revision of scale of assistance to Sportspersons  
and National Sports Federation.  He added that with a view to give a boost to the preparation of 
Indian athletes for Rio Olympics, 2016 and enhancing the medal hopes of the country, the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports has made upward revision of various financial parameters 
under the Scheme of Assistance to National Sports Federation on 27th October, 2015.  As per the 
revised norms, the amount for holding National Championships  has been revised from 2 lakh 
for seniors, juniors and sub-juniors to 5 lakh for seniors, 7 lakh for juniors and 10 lakh for sub-
juniors.  This will help catch sporting talent young.  To promote traditional tournaments, a new 
provision of assistance of up-to 5 lakh each for such events has been made.  Such tournaments 
will be identified by a Committee of experts.  Assistance of 25 lakh will be available for holding 
prestigious tournaments in India.  This will help improve the quality of tournaments.  
109. The Secretary further added that Senior players and coaches will be allowed to travel by 
air in economy class for a distance beyond 500 kms.  Similarly, junior players will be disallowed to 
travel by air in economy class for a distance beyond 1200 kms.  Sub-junior players will be allowed 
to travel by ACIII tier.  Earlier, air travel was not admissible and senior players were travelling by 
AC- II tier and junior and sub-junior players were travelling by sleeper class for domestic 
competitions.   This will make participation by athletes less stressful and convenient.  Air travel 
has been allowed for coaching camps and competitions held in the North-East Region.  Similarly, 
the athletes from the North –East Region will be allowed air travel from their residence/coaching 
camps to and from Kolkata.  Medical insurance policy of 5 lakhs and Personal Accident Policy of 

25 lakhs for athletes has been allowed.  For international events held in India, the quantum of 
financial assistance has been enhanced from 10 lakhs to 30 lakhs per tournament.  The 
assistance can be utilized for boarding, lodging, transportation, rent of playfields, cost of 
consumable equipment, certificates, medals, awards and prize money. Prior to the revision, there 
was no provision of assistance for prize money.  The salary of various support personnel like 
doctors, physiotherapists, psychologists, masseurs, etc has also been substantially hiked to 
attract highly skilled personnel to assist the athletes.  High Performance Specialist Coaches with a 
remuneration up to 2 lakh per month can be engaged by SAI/NSFs for sports disciplines included 
in mega events.  The salary of Chief Coach has been enhanced by three times from 50,000 to 
1,50,000 per month.  Higher salary will also be allowed in specific deserving cases.  The salary of 
other coaches has also been enhanced from 30,000 to 75,000 per month.  This will incentivize 
good coaches.  NSFs have been allowed to procure equipment upto 10 lakh.  Above that 
amount, the procurement will be done by Sports Authority of India (SAI). Evaluation of athletes 
performance from Sports Science point of view has been allowed.  An amount of 15000/-per 
athlete per International participation (if camp is not held before competition) for undergoing 
evaluation from Sports Science and Medical Fitness point of view will be paid by the Government.  
110. The Department of Sports submitted that although India has a large population, its 
achievement in Sports is not commensurate with its size. It submitted that Sports Sector accounts 
for 2% of GDP of European Union and the total employment generated by Sports activities is 7.3 
million –equivalent to 3.5 % of the total EU employment. To highlight this point the Department 
submitted the comparative figures of some Countries vis-à-vis India : - 
Country No. of Medals in 
London Olympics, 
2012 
Population per medal Per capita per day 
spending on Sports 
(INR) 
USA 103 3 Million 22 
UK 65 1 Million 0.50 
Jamaica 12 0.23 Million 0.19 
India 6 204.1 Million 0.3 
 
111. The Department pointed out that the state of the Indian Sports are mainly for the 
following reasons: - 

a. Government of India and State Governments together spend only around 3 paisa per 
capita per day on Sports. Unlike in other Countries, Sports in India is largely 
dependent on the State with a very small investment from Private Sector; 
b. Sports is not the first choice as career for most Sportspersons and most of them drop 
out because of high risk, uncertainty and low rewards, which needs to be changed; 
c. Lagging behind other Countries in terms of skill, technology, state-of-the art 
equipments, sports medicine, better support etc. 
It, therefore urged the PSUs/PSBs/Corporates to : - 
i)   contribute to NSDF; 
ii)   Fund selected Athletes/disciplines under the TOP Scheme; 
iii) Adopt a SAI Centre to upgrade to the International Standards.A Statement provided 
by the Department of Sports indicating the funds required for upgrading and 
maintenance of SAI Centres as per International Standards is at ANNEXURE – III; 
iv) Sponsor prize money tournaments in 9 high priority disciplines viz. Hockey, Shooting, 
Tennis, Wrestling, Boxing, Archery, Athletics, Badminton and Weightlifting. 
Approximate expenditure has been estimated around Rs. 2 Crores per sport i.e., Rs.18 
Crores per year; and  
v) Recruit Sportspersons at appropriate level and give incentives and promotions on the 
basis of their performance. The DoPT guidelines in this regard are attached at 
ANNEXURE - IV. 
Successful conduct of 12th South Asian Games: 
112.  The Committee was further informed that India successfully hosted 12th South 
Asian Games at Guwahati and Shillong from 5-16 February, 2016 at a very short lead time of 100 
days.  12th South Asian Games were declared open by Prime Minister in a glittering opening 
ceremony on 5th February, 2016 at Guwahati.  After 12 days of competitive spirit and bonhomie 
among sportspersons and teams from 8 participating SAARC countries, 12th South Asian Games 
were concluded on 16th February, 2016.  The Games were conducted successfully and smoothly 
amidst severe time constraints for upgradation and renovation of sports infrastructure and 
facilities and other challenges.  The Games were conducted in a very professional manner.  12th 
South Asian Games saw participation of about 2500 athletes from eight nations in 226 events 
over 22 sports.  
GAIL 
113. The representative of GAIL submitted this GAIL has contributed 50 lakhs towards 
organizing of 12th South Asian Games held in Guwahati and Sikkim in September, 2015. GAIL has 

not contributed towards NSDF. GAIL is contributing to Petroleum Sports Promotion Board which 
was established in June, 1979, registered under the Society’s Registration Act, with objectives to 
develop, promote, encourage, co-ordinate and organize various sports and games under the 
petroleum sector and country at large. Currently 12 Public Sector Organizations from the 
Petroleum Sector are members of PSPB and also contribute to the yearly budget of PSPB.  
GAIL Sponsored players 
o Sh. Yogender Pal Singh, Indian Shooter, Italy/ Australia (2 lac) 
o Sh. Ravi Kumar, Mountaineer, Kathmandu (Mt. Everest) 1.12 lac) 
o Ms. PrernaDangi, Mountaineer, Alaska (2.06 lac) 
o Dr. Surender Punia, Medical Army Corps., Crotia (4 lac) 
o Capt. G Rajkumar, GAIL Badminton Player, Turkey. (1.85 lac) 
o Ms. Goli Sandhya, Chess Player, Missouri, Singapore, USA (5.50 lac) 
GAIL sponsored events    
o 9TH  National Floorball Championship held on 27th -29th Jan 2015 at Tyagraj 
Stadium, ND (Rs.5 lac) 
o Delhi Olympic 2015, state Games held at new Delhi from 23rd-30th October 2015 
( 5 lac) 
o “GAIL GOLD CUP” All India Sevens Football Tournament held in starting January 
2016, Kondotty, Mallappuram (15 lac) 
 
114. GAIL through its CSR Initiatives has undertaken few Events for the Promotion of Sports at 
the national level. Recently a National Level program has been launched by GAIL.  National hunt 
for Indian Speed Star  2016, to select and groom the children from 500 districts in the age group 
of 11-17 yrs. and to coach them for participating in the 2020 Olympic games. GAIL has its 
approved sports promotion policy to promote sports both within the company at 
National/International levels. As a sports promotion initiative, GAIL has appointed 3 players on 
regular basis and engaged 20 players on scholarship basis. GAIL has been following various 
instructions/ guidelines of the Ministry for recruitment of Sports Persons. Presently India’s top 
notable International players are with Oil fraternity such as:- 
Achanta Sharath Kamal (Table Tennis) -      Indian Oil 
Pankaj Advani (Billiard & Snooker)   -      ONGC 
Saina Nehwal (Badminton)           -      BPCL 
Gautam Gambhir (Cricket)           -      ONGC 
Poulomi Ghatak (Table Tennis)       -      BPCL 

Jwala Gutta (Badminton)             -     BPCL 
Saketh Myneni (Tennis)              -     GAIL 
Presently GAIL has players in the following field of sports: 
On regular rolls 
Game Nos. of Players 
Golf           02    
Badminton   01   
On Scholarship (on Monthly stipend) 
Golf       03 (Men)   
Badminton     04 (Men)        
Table Tennis     04 (2 Men, 2 Women) 
Lawn Tennis     04 (2 Men, 2 Women) 
Billiard & Snooker   03 (Men) 
There has been no fixed quota for sports persons at GAIL, however, 6 vacancies in the 
discipline of Badminton (02), Lawn Tennis (02), Table Tennis (02) for sportsperson have been 
created and recruitment is in process.   
115. GAIL has financially contributed towards developments and promotions of sports in North 
East regions and tribal regions of the country as below: 
 GAIL contributed 50 lakhs for organizing of 12th South Asian Games in the year 2015 held 
at Guwahati & Sikkim. 
 GAIL contributed 50 lakhs towards sponsorship of International Tribal games held in the 
year 2015 at Bengaluru. 
GAIL has no interface with the Sports University being set up in North East Region, however, 
efforts would be made to seek relevant details for its development. 
116. In the perspective of existing National Sports Policy 2001, GAIL along with other Oil PSUs 
is contributing to Promotion of sports at National level through Petroleum Sports Promotion 
Board which has been providing Grants in Aid to outstanding sportspersons of its member 
organizations for their participation in National & International events with a view to provide 
them opportunity to improve their performances to its credit, PSPB has 3 Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna 
Awardees, 1 Dronacharya Awardee and 44 Arjuna Awardees in its fold. 
  

MMTC 
117. MMTC has primarily limited itself to promotion of sports in its operational area of Joint 
Venture Steel Plant in Odisha.  So far, due to limited profits it has not made contribution to the 
NSDF. MMTC has sponsored the equipment for women hockey players at the Shahbad Hockey 
training centre in Haryana in 2012-13. This sports centre has been the training ground for hockey 
players especially girls, who have represented India in International tournaments like World Cup, 
Commonwealth Games, Asiad Games and Afro-Asian games etc.  MMTC provided them with 
equipment – hockey sticks, balls, pads, gloves, helmets etc. to be utilized for the purpose of 
supporting the training of these talented girls.  Some of these girls were part of the Indian 
Women’s Hockey team, which went on to win the Bronze medal in the Jr. Women’s Hockey 
World Cup. 
 
118. MMTC has also provided financial assistance to the Paralympic Society of India to 
facilitate their participation in the “Para Olympics” in 2011-12.  Due to limited profits, MMTC in 
last few years has made voluntary contribution to CSR including promotion of sports.  However, 
promotion of sports being an integral part of MMTC’s CSR Policy, Board of Directors of MMTC, in 
its recent meeting held on 1.4.2016, have decided to allocate 20% of the annual budgeted 
amount of CSR towards promotion of Sports subject to minimum of 5.00 lakhs.  
 
119. Consequent upon the interaction with the Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Human Resource Development held in Chandigarh on 20.11.2015, MMTC CSR 
Policy has been modified to include 20% of the total amount of CSR Budget towards Promotion of 
Sports subject to minimum of 5.00 lakhs in the following form- 
1. Support/ adopt any Sports Authority of India Institution for promotion of sports. 
2. Support sportspersons with proven potential at the National level with financial 
support for training kits, travel grants, etc. to participate or to be able to qualify for 
International level competition as recognized by the concerned National or 
International Sports Body. 
3. Support any Sports Meet/ Event sponsored by Central/ State Government. 
 
120. Recruitment in MMTC is only at the entry level of Group ‘A’ posts, as Deputy Managers.  
Only a limited number of officers are being recruited every year in group ‘A’ post on need basis.  
MMTC, though a member of All India Public Sector Sports Promotion Board, has not set up any 
Sports Promotion Board of its own. Over last decade MMTC has spent approx. 269 lacs for 

sports promotion under CSR. A commitment was made to contribute 10 lakh to NSDF for 
promotion of sports. At present MMTC has not taken up sports promotion in North East, but it 
had extended financial assistance for a sports event organized in the tribal areas of Odisha.  As 
20% of CSR budget has been earmarked for promotion of sports under revised CSR policy 
approved by the Board, MMTC will also take up activity for development and promotion of sports 
in North East. 
 
121. For the present, MMTC does not have any interface with the Sports University being set 
up in the North East Region. However, MMTC has opened its office at Guwahati, Assam in June 
2016, for business development in North East which would also facilitate in contributing 
promotion of sports in North East. The sports promotion initiatives undertaken by the Company 
under CSR are in line with measures envisaged in National Sports Policy, 2001. 
CONCOR/INDIAN RAILWAYS(IR) 
122. The representatives of Railways submitted the Ministry of Railways has an existing sports 
policy.  He informed that the Indian Railways promotes sports activities in the following ways: -  
 
o Recruitment of Sports Persons 
o Promotions to Sports Persons 
o Incentives to Sports Persons 
o Carrying of various sports activities within and outside railways  
 
123. The Committee was further informed that Indian Railways had close interaction and 
liaisoning with all the Zonal Railways Sports Associations with reference to sports activities being 
carried out within and outside Railways. There was representation of Railways at all the sports 
forums such as various National Sports Federations, Sports Authority of India (SAI), Ministry of 
Youth Affairs and Sports, World Railway Sports Organization (USIC).  He also added that IR also 
coordinated with various National Sports Bodies pertaining to latest guidelines, policies, training 
and selection of Railway sportspersons at National and International levels. IR plan, organize and 
conduct various sports meets at Zonal Level and All India Railway Level. IR also conducts National 
Championships and International Championships as and when allotted to Indian Railways.  IR 
strategize the sports structure such as development of sports infrastructure, training of sports 
persons, training of coaches, recruitment of talented sportspersons; so that Indian Railways 
continue to remain a dominant force in the field of Sports. 

124. The representative submitted that for Recruitment of sportspersons and their promotion 
avenues, the following Policy for recruitment on Zonal Railways & Production Units against sports 
quota exists:- 
There are 29 recognized games for recruitment against sports quota. These games are:- 
Aquatics, Archery, Athletics, Badminton, Ball Badminton, Basketball, Billiards & Snooker, 
(including 8-Ball & 9-Ball Pool), Body Building, Boxing, Bridge, Chess, Cricket, Cross Country, 
Cycling, Football, Golf, Gymnastics, Handball, Hockey, Judo, Kabaddi, Kho-Kho, Power-
lifting, Shooting, Table Tennis, Tennis, Volleyball, Weightlifting, Wrestling (Free Style & 
Greco-Roman Only) 
Recruitment done through Talent Scouting and Open Advertisement. 
For this purpose, annual recruitment quota is allotted to each Zonal Railway and Production 
Unit for recruitment in Grade Pay 1800/- to 4200/-.  
Recruitment in different grade pay is done keeping in view the sports achievement of a 
sportsperson in different level of championships. Recruitment in Grade Pay 1800/- is done 
only through Open Advertisement. 
Total annual recruitment quota in different Grade Pay are as under:  
Name  
of Pay 
Band / 
Scale 
 
Pay Bands/ 
Scales 
Corresponding 
Grade Pay 
Total Annual 
Quota allotted 
for recruitment 
to each 
PB-2 9,300-34,800  4,200 24 
PB-1 5,200-20,200 2,800/ 2,400 136 
PB-1 5,200-20,200 2,000/ 1,900 440 
PB-1 5,200-20,200 1,800 620 
 
Age limit of recruitment is 18 to 25 years, however lower & upper age relaxation can be 
granted to outstanding sportspersons by Railway Board for recruitment through talent 
scouting quota to outstanding sportspersons only. 
Sportspersons should possess the minimum educational qualification, as applicable to the 
post to which the sportsperson is to be appointed. However, for recruitment through 
talent scouting, relaxation can be granted by Railway Board to outstanding sportspersons, 
subject to acquiring the same within four years from the date of appointment. 
Recruitment in Grade Pay 1900/- to 4200/- is done on the basis of the performance of the 
player in National/Inter-University/International Championships.  

For recruitment in Grade Pay 1800/-, at least Bronze Medal in Senior State or participation in 
Junior/Youth/Senior National Championships, is required. 
For recruitment through talent scouting, recognized sports achievements should be in the current and/or immediate previous one financial year; and sportspersons should be an active player and for Open Advertisement the sports achievement should be in the current and/or immediate previous two financial years. 
125. There is also a Policy for Out-of-Turn Promotion on Zonal Railways & Production Units 
against sports quota 
i) Out-of-turn promotions are permissible to Non-Gazetted posts of Pay Band-1 and Pay Band-2. 
ii) General Manager/Head of the Organization are competent to grant such out-of-turn 
promotions to sportspersons fulfilling the sports and all other norms as per policy.  
iii) For promotion from Grade Pay 1800/- to Grade Pay 1900/- minimum medal winning 
performance in a National Championship on single occasion is required. For out-of-turn 
promotion from higher grade pay, at least three medal winning performance in National/ 
World Railway Championships in three different occasions is required.  
iv) Out-of-turn promotion is affected from the date of conclusion of event which entitles a 
sportsperson/coach for out-of-turn promotion. 
v) As per existing policy, coaches are also entitled for Out-of-Turn Promotion to next higher post 
in his/her cadre in Non-Gazetted post of Pay Band 1 & 2 who trained a sportsperson or a 
team winning a medal in any recognized International Championship. Not more than two 
Out-of-Turn Promotions can be granted to a Coach in the entire service career, with a gap of 
minimum four years between the two promotions.  
 
126. The representative of Railways added that for Promotion of Sports in General, Railways 
had done the following:- 
Sports Activities:  
Inter-Divisional, Inter-Railway Championships in all recognized disciplines are organized every 
year. Indian Railway regularly participates in Sr. National and Federation Cup Tournaments. 
Besides, Railway Sportspersons represent the Country in International Events. Indian Railways 
also participate in World Railway Championships in some selected games. 
Recruitment of Sportspersons:  
Indian Railways recruits 500-600 sports persons every year in the recognized sports disciplines. 
For this purpose, sports recruitment quota is allotted to all the Zonal Railways and Production 
Units and efforts are continuously being made to recruit more and more talented sportspersons 
in Indian Railways.  

Incentives:  
Provision exists for grant of incentives such as out-of-turn promotion, additional increments, cash 
awards etc. for meritorious performance. There is no dearth of financial support to deserving 
sportspersons. 
Practice Leave: 
Under Centre of Excellency Scheme, outstanding players are given 330 days of Special Casual 
Leave for intensive practice. 
127. The representative submitted that the notable recent achievements of Indian Railways 
sports persons in the field of sports at International and levels:-  
International Level 
i)  In Commonwealth Games 2014 at Glasgow, Scotland from 23rd July to 3rd August, 2014. 
The contribution of Railway sportspersons in the Country’s medal tally in the Commonwealth 
Games, held at Glasgow, Scotland 23rd July to 3rd August, 2014, has been significant. Out of total 
64 Medals won by India, Railway sports persons bagged 9 Medals. The performance of Railways’ 
weightlifters and wrestlers in particular, has been remarkable. They have contributed two Gold, 
one Silver and two Bronze Medals. The names of the Gold medal winners are Shri Sushil Kumar: 
Men’s freestyle 74 kg wrestling, Shri Satiesh Sivalingam: Men’s 77 kg weightlifting, Silver Medal 
Winners are Shri Mandeep Jangra: Men’s 69 kg boxing, Shri Chinglensana Singh: Hockey, Ms. 
Ayonika Paul: Women’s 10 metre air rifle shooting, Shri Rajeev Tomar: Men’s freestyle 125 kg 
wrestling and Bronze Medal winners  are – Ms. Pinki Rani: Women’s 48-51 kg boxing, Ms. Swati 
Singh: Women’s 53 kg weightlifting, Shri Omkar Otari: Men’s 69 kg weightlifting. 
ii)  In Asian Games 2014 at Incheon (Korea) from 19th September to 4th October, 2014. 
The contribution of Railway sportspersons in the Country’s medal tally in the Asian Games 2014 
at Incheon (Korea) from 19th September to 4th October, 2014, was also remarkable. Out to total 
57 Medals won by India, Railway sports persons bagged 12 Medals. The performance of Railways 
Athletes and Hockey members in particular has been remarkable. They have contributed four 
Gold, three Silver and five Bronze Medals.  
  

 
iii)  In South Asian Games – 2016 held at Guwahati and Shillong from 5th to 16th February, 
2016 
 
Out of the 81 Railway athletes who participated, 76 (Approximately 94 %) had a medal winning 
performance. Out of total 308 Medal won by India, Railway Sports persons bagged 67 Medals. 
iv)  On the basis of their performance during different championships, the following Railways’ 
players have qualified till then, for representing the Country in the Olympics in 2016:- 
S.No.  Name     Game 
 
1. Shri Mangal Singh Champia   Archery 
2. Ms. L. Bombayla Devi   Archery 
3. Ms. Laxmirani Majhi     Archery 
4. Ms. O.P. Jaisha      Athletics  
5. Ms. Lalita Babar      Athletics 
6. Ms. Tintu Luka      Athletics  
7. Ms. Sudha Singh     Athletics 
8. Ms. Manpreet Kaur     Athletics 
9. Ms. Khusbir Kaur     Athletics 
10. Shri Hardeep Singh    Greco-Roman Wrestling 
11. Ms. Ayonika Paul     Shooting 
12. Shri Sandeep Sejwal     Swimming 
13. Shri Sajan Prakash    Swimming  
14. Shri Satiesh Kumar    Weightlifting 
15. Ms. S. Chanu      Weightlifting  
16. Ms. Shakshi Malik    Wrestling 
 
In addition to the above, 3 players in India’s Men Hockey team and 16 in Indian Women Hockey 
team probables for Rio Olympic Games 2016, are from Indian Railways. It was also mentioned 
that this is the largest contingent ever of Railways players.  
128. The Committee appreciates the effort put in by Indian Railways for promotion of sports 
in India and the initiatives taken by it at various levels starting from Zonal level to National and 
International levels.  The Committee suggests that since Indian Railways has a vast Network 
across the Country, it should consider setting up of Sports Centres in rural areas also, which will 
also improve their out reach as well as increase their pool of Sportspersons. The Committee 
also recommends that SAI should co-ordinate with Indian Railways in setting up these rural 
centres and also provide expertise.  
 

POWERGRID CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD. 
 
129. The representatives of Powergrid Corporation of India Ltd., informed that the company 
had, as per the comprehensive guidelines for promotion of sports, conducted Inter-regional 
Tournaments on annual basis for the employees or children of employees for the following 
sports/games: 
- Athletics  
- Badminton  
- Carom and Bridge 
- Chess 
- Cricket  
- Football 
- Kabaddi 
- Lawn Tennis 
- Table Tennis 
- Volley Ball 
 
To ensure that the sports meets are conducted in organized manner and are spread over the 
entire year, Corporate Centre, in consultation with regional centres, finalizes the yearly schedule 
for different sports meet in the beginning of the year and circulates the same to all concerned for 
implementation.  Each region is assigned one or two sports events for conducting Inter-Regional 
Meet by rotation. POWERGRID provides all sports infrastructural facilities and other assistance 
like fields/play grounds with relevant equipment for organizing the inter-regional sports meet. 
Sports kits are also provided to the players.  The procedures for selection of employees for 
various tournaments and conditioning camp have also been defined in the guidelines. 
130. POWERGRID has developed various sports facilities at Sub-stations, Regional Head 
Quarters and at Corporate Centre like: 
Football ground at Jabalpur, Kanpur and Bhadrawati sub-stations 
Cricket ground at Jabalpur, Kanpur, Dehgam sub-stations 
Facilities for Table Tennis, Chess, Carom, Badminton courts (Indoor/Outdoor) and Gymnasium 
at all major Sub-stations of POWERGRID, at all nine Regional Head Quarter and Corporate 
Centre 
Facilities of Skating Ground, Volley ball and Lawn Tennis courts are also available at Corporate 
Centre, Gurgaon 
For encouraging Sports activities, there is provision in the Leave Rules of POWERGRID for 
granting Special Casual Leave to employees as below: 
Special Casual Leave upto 30 days in a calendar year may be granted: 
To employees selected to represent the Company in tournaments recognized by the 
State/National Association for the game concerned. 

To employees selected to represent the District or the State or All India in a 
recognized tournament. 
To employees selected to participate in training/coaching camps by State 
Associations. 
To employees required to act as Umpires in tournaments of National/International 
importance. 
To employees selected to participate in local tournament on behalf of POWERGRID. 
To employees participating in mountaineering and trekking arranged by recognized 
clubs/associations. 
Employees participating in inter-unit or inter-Departmental tournament can also be granted 
Special Casual Leave not exceeding 10 days at a time, which can also be permitted by 
competent authority to be combined with Earned Leave. 
 
131. The representatives further added that POWERGRID participates in the Inter-CPSU sports 
tournament conducted by Power Sports Control Board (PSCB) or any other body.  For such 
participation, POWERGRID teams are selected on the basis of inter-regional tournament.  Playing 
kits, cost sharing on travelling, boarding and lodging and incentives to winners are well defined as 
mentioned below:- 
Special incentive for Winners: 
The Special incentive for wining in Inter-CPSU tournament are as under: 
Team Event: 
1st Position : 2000/- to all members. 
2nd Position : 1000/- to all members. 
Individual and Doubles Event: 
1st Position : 5000/-(to both players in case of doubles) 
2nd Position : 3000/-(to both players in case of doubles). 
He further pointed out that POWERGRID Sports Promotion Council (PSPC), an advisory apex body 
has been constituted for taking various measures for building up sports, infrastructural facilities 
and development of sports culture.   
The PSPC Objectives were:- 
a) To inculcate sports consciousness and awareness amongst employees/family members 
b) To suggest necessary sports infrastructural facilities to encourage participation on large 
scale. 
c) To identify talented children of POWERGRID employees as well as others and to train and 
nurture them so as to help realize their full potential. 
d) To advise POWERGRID on recruitment of Sports Persons of repute and engagement of 
coaches to ensure that proper training/coaching is imparted to all. 
e) To suggest incentives in terms of leave/financial benefits. 

f) To build and develop POWERGRID teams for various events and field them in 
National/State/Local events. 
 
As regards recruitment of Sportspersons in Powergrid Corporation, it was submitted that most of 
the recruitments are done for Technical post/professionals in engineering and managements.  
Hence, recruitment for Group ‘C’ posts are negligible and after accounting for other reservations 
for SCs/Sts etc hardly any percentage is left of sportsperson.  Hence, no recruitment is presently 
done by them. 
132. The representative further added that under CSR, POWERGRID has undertaken various 
activities primarily towards creating sports infrastructure in different parts of the Country 
including in the North-East and Tribal Regions. POWERGRID has not fixed any percentage of funds 
earmarked for CSR to be spent on any activity enlisted in Schedule VII of the Companies Act. 
Proposals which are conceived and initiated by various POWERGRID offices are placed before the 
CSR Committee for its consideration and recommendations for eventual sanction by the Board of 
Directors. 
NTPC 
133. The representative of NTPC submitted that it received a request for contribution to NSDF 
before Common Wealth Games 2010 and a contribution of 20 Crores was made by way of 
sponsorship to the organizing Committee of the games.   For promotion of sports, NTPC has 
constituted the National Sports Promotion Board in 1985.  National Sports Promotion Board has 
structure of executive Committee at the apex level, regional sub-Committee and local councils.  
The objectives of the Scheme include promoting, developing and organizing sports events in 
NTPC and other establishments. Identifying sporting talents and nurturing sports talents and 
from amongst land oustees and local population and develop them.  Various events are 
organized in around 13 sports disciplines like Football, Volleyball, Basket Ball, Badminton, TT, 
Hockey, Cricket, Tennis, Bridge, Chess, Swimming, and Billiards.   
134. NTPC Sports Promotion Board is a member of All India Public Sector Sports Promotion 
Board (AIPSSPB) and member of Power Sports Control Board (PSCB).  NTPC has been sponsoring 
employees regularly for Airtel Half Marathon at Delhi and Pinkthon Marathon for ladies at Delhi.  
Apart from the above, all projects Sports Councils are functioning and sports are regularly 
organized through Welfare Clubs and Competitions are held every year.  Approximately about 

60 lacs are spent annually on organizing sports for employees and their family members 
through sports councils, clubs and welfare bodies.  
NTPC has also been sponsoring deserving candidates for sports in International competitions.  In 
line with item no (vii) of Schedule VII of Companies Act, 2013, ‘training to promote rural sports, 
Nationally recognized sports, Paralympics sports and Olympics sports’, NTPC’s CSR &  
Sustainability Policy provides for taking up activities like rural sports, competitions, coaching 
camps, distribution of sports kit, promotion of traditional/Nationally recognized sports, 
Paralympics sports & Olympics Sports and sports related infrastructure.   NTPC Board has 
approved to allocate about 1-2% of CSR budget for sports related activities.  In order to promote 
rural sports, NTPC Stations/Projects take up the following activities in neighbourhood villages on 
a regular basis: 
- Rural sports competitions. 
- Coaching camps, distribution of Sports Kit 
- Sports related infrastructure. 
135. The representative further added that NTPC spent about 113 lacs in 2014-15 and 141 
lacs in 2015-16 for undertaking the above sports related activities with about 10,000 
beneficiaries.  NTPC has allocated an amount of 10 crore  for “Sports Stadium” for promotion of 
sports, create and maintain infrastructure facilities of International standard and nurture sports 
talents in the Country, to be operationalized through Power Sports Control Board (PSCB).    On a 
specific query on sports promotion of North-Eastern and Tribal Region, it was submitted that 
NTPC follows norms and guidelines for recruitment as per government directives and there is no 
separate sports quota earmarked for it. Further, it was submitted that one project in Bongaigaon 
is located in Assam, in the North-East and many other projects like Korba in Chhattisgarh and 
Rihand in Sonebhadra (U.P) are in the tribal belt, where NTPC promotes sports for land oustees 
as well as people around the projects.  NTPC also promotes deserving sporting activities pan India 
outside the organization.  For the year 2013-14, the organization has sponsored a total amount of 
47.50 lacs for events like Marathon, Tennis, Hockey, Badminton, Football, Snooker, Wrestling, 
Handball and Cricket.  In the year 2014-15, NTPC had sponsored an amount of 82.50 lacs for 
events like Inter-state Athletic Events Meet, Tennis, Football, Polio, Forest Sports Meet, Hockey, 
Snooker.  In the year 2015-16, NTPC had sponsored 2 Crores for World Hockey League held at 
Raipur and 34 lacs for Mountaineering, Tennis, Badminton & TT. Various Sports tournaments 

are organized in two groups, namely Junior Group for students studying up VII & senior group for 
students studying in Class VIII-XII for boys and girls separately.  All the Tournaments are 
organized through Sports Council.  The cash prizes for TT, Tennis, Badminton are 5000/- for 
winner and 3000/- for Runner-up, while for Cricket 20,000/- for Winner Team and 15,000/- 
for Runner-up Team.  
FCI 
136. The representatives of Food Corporation of India (FCI) submitted that there is a Sports 
Control Board at present known as Sports Promotion Board, FCI. Under the control/guidelines of 
Sports Promotion Board (SPB), Sports Committees are functioning at Zonal/Regional level, called 
as Zonal/Regional Sports Promotion Committee. SPB encourages its sportspersons through 
participation in various prominent Tournaments as well as All India Public Sector Tournaments/ 
National Championships in almost all major disciplines of sports, FCI also encourages 
sportspersons by providing financial assistance for their participation in accredited International 
events abroad.    
137. The Food Corporation of India Sports Promotion Board organizes All India Inter-Zonal 
Tournaments in Football, Cricket, Hockey, Badminton and Table Tennis every year.  FCI Sports 
Promotion Board and its Zonal Sports Promotion Committees are affiliated with the under 
mentioned National & State level Federations/Associations: 
1. Indian Football Association 
2. Badminton Association of India 
3. Table Tennis Federation of India 
4. Hockey India 
5. Indian Power-lifting Federation 
6. Indian Weightlifting Federation 
7. All India Public Sector Sports Promotion Board 
8. Delhi & District Cricket Association 
9. Delhi Hockey Association 
10. Delhi Soccer Association 
11. Delhi Table Tennis Association  
12. Delhi Badminton Association  
 
138. FCI has been encouraging young, talented and budding students/ sports persons since 
1986 through Stipend Scheme keeping with the objectives of National Sports Policy.  The monthly 
stipend ranging from 8000 p.m (Elite Stipend) to 15000 p.m (Premier Stipend) are granted in 

the age groups of 15-18 years and 18-24 years.   About 150 promising sportspersons showing 
potential for outstanding performances are granted stipend in the scheme.  The sportspersons 
are given adequate exposure at State/National level, as part of the FCI team.  FCI also gives 
various cash incentives for sportspersons at various levels starting from 5000/- at State level to 
10 lakhs for Olympics medal winning performance and also National and Internationals award 
winners (Arjuna, Padma, Dronacharya etc.).  Apart from this, other incentives like additional 
increments are given to sportspersons, coaches, referees and umpires. 
139. The representatives also informed that recruitment of sportspersons is done from time to 
time in accordance to Government of India Policy guidelines and provisions FCI (staff) 
Regulations.  At present, there is a total of 276 sportspersons under its rolls. As regards 
contribution to NSDF, FCI representative submitted that the Corporation does not earn any profit 
as it manages food subsidy schemes of Government of India and hence it does not come under 
the Companies Act and rules relating to CSR.  Hence, FCI does not make any contribution to NSDF 
but Sports Promotion Board of FCI has been working since last 3 decades.  It also submitted that 
430.77 lakhs (in 2013-14) and 374.84 lakhs (provisional for 2014-15), out of which, 69.26 
lakhs and 61.61 lakhs were spent in the North Eastern Region.   
140. The Committee notes that there is still some confusion among the PSUs regarding NSDF 
and CSR.  The Committee observes that CSR comes under the Companies Act, while NSDF 
comes under Society Endowment Act.  Hence, contribution under CSR cannot be equated to 
NSDF.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Sports, in coordination 
with Department of Public Enterprises and Department of Corporate Affairs, should 
immediately undertake with right earnest, to educate the PSUs/PSBs about the functioning of 
NSDF as well as the process of making contributions thereto. 
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD. 
 
141. SAIL has established several residential Sports Academics like: 
- Football Academy at Burnpur (Senior Boys) 
- Football Academy at Bokaro (Boys) 
- Hockey Academy at Rourkela (Boys) 
- Athletics Academy at Bhilai (Boys) 
- Athletics Academy at Durgapur (Girls) 
- Archery Academy at Kiriburu (Boys & Girls) 
 

The Sports academics cover the peripheral areas of the steel plants as well as different regions of 
the Country and select suitable young talents for enrolment. The trainees are put through strict 
training by well-qualified coaches in each of the fields and groomed to higher levels of 
competence. Since then, the area of sports has expanded manifold in SAIL and encompasses 
National and International level sports events and association of eminent sports persons.  The 
basic philosophy of SAIL for development of sports academy focuses on: 
- Spotting young talent with the idea of ‘Catching’em Young, and imparting training to 
them to raise them to National and International standards. 
- Developing a few selected disciplines for better attention and results. 
- Formation of academics in selected sports disciplines. 
- Promoting promising talents by awarding scholarships 
142. A Committee at the Corporate Level of the Company monitors all the sports Academy 
activities of SAIL, including policy formations and their implementation, budget, co-ordination 
with the steel plants and outside agencies etc. The Committee’s work is aided by a sports cell in 
each plant/unit, headed by a sports officer, which conducts year-long sports activities in different 
disciplines at the unit level. 
NATIONAL BUILDINGS CONSTRUCTION CORPORATION (NBCC) 
143. The National Buildings Construction Corporation (NBCC) Limited submitted that it  has not 
contributed any amount to NSDF from CSR Funds for want of specific proposal nor has it 
sponsored any individual player nor adopted any SAI centre/events etc from CSR Funds as no 
such proposal is available with NBCC. During the FY 2012-13, NBCC has sponsored the Future Kids 
Scheme of Bengal Tennis Association, Kolkata and has extended financial help of 500 lacs to 
Bengal Tennis Association. Under this Scheme, 12 boys and girls from clubs and Tennis Centres all 
over Kolkata and neighboring districts of West Bengal were adopted by Bengal Tennis Association 
through an intensive selection trail.  Bengal Tennis Association has spent on clothing, tennis 
coaching, fitness, participation in tournaments and exchange programs with reputed tennis 
academics in Europe, Australia and America.  Mission of the Scheme was to produce National & 
International level Tennis Players.   
144. The Committee was informed that a draft sport policy for promotion of sports in the 
Company as well as in the Country and weightage for recruitment of sportspersons has been 
prepared and is under consideration.  The representatives submitted that no guidelines from the 
Government/Ministry have been received by it.  NBCC also does not have a Sports Promotion 

Board presently. The Committee is happy to note the representative of NBCC committed for 
making a contribution of 10 lakhs for NSDF and encourage other PSUs to take similar steps to 
improve the status of sports in the Country and infrastructure facilities for games. 
POWER FINANCE CORPORATION 
145. Power Finance Corporation (PFC) submitted that a PFC is a regular member of Power 
Sports Control Board (PSCB) has been paying annual membership on yearly basis to PSCB and at 
the membership fees at 2.5 lakh.  PFC has been regularly nominating its employees to various 
sports tournaments organized by the power sector (PSUs) across the year.  They also submitted 
that PFC has established Gym facilities to maintain the fitness of its employees and table tennis.  
They also submitted that PFC had not received any formal communication about establishment 
of National Sports Development Fund and contribution to be made by CPSE in this fund.  PFC also 
submitted that no request had been received from Ministry of Sports requesting contribution in 
the NSDF.  
HUDCO  
146. Housing & Urban Development Corporation Limited (HUDCO) has contributed 75lacs to 
NSDF in the following events: 
i) 25 lacs in 2000 for augmenting the resources for creation of infrastructure for 
sports. 
ii) 25 lacs in 2003 for utilization for 8th National Youth Festival at Thiruvananthapuram 
iii) 25 lacs in 2003 for Afro-Asian Games, Government of Andhra Pradesh. 
 It was informed that HUDCO has not sponsored any individual players through CSR, nor is there 
any bifurcation of funds available under CSR, for Sports activities. However, it was informed that 
a fresh proposal will be initiated for framing a sports policy.  The representative of  HUDCO 
informed the Committee that it has not received guidelines from Government or the Ministry of 
HUPA in this regard and hence there is currently no Sports Promotion Board in HUDCO. The 
following steps are being taken for promotion of sports:- 
 Sponsoring of sports events organized by other organizations (Income Tax Sports 
Recreation Club) 
 Annual Sports Day is being organized by HUDCO for its employees. 

147. The Committee visited the Athletic Track inside the main stadium of Jawaharlal Nehru 
Sports Complex to assess the available track and field facilities as well as interaction with 
coaches and budding athletes practicing there.  Track and field facilities are usually designed as 
multi-purpose facilities, and generally used for daily training as well as staging National, 
regional or local competitions. The staging of competitions at higher levels, of course, entails 
more extensive requirements for sports facilities, particularly concerning the infrastructure and 
regular maintenance. The Committee was dismayed to find the worn-out status of track and 
field facilities. The upkeep seemed to be disastrous and grass field surrounded inside this oval 
running track was also in pitiable condition. The track had caved in at several places and was 
dangerous for anybody   going for athletics practice.  It was told that there was a tunnel 
underneath the track and was prone to collapse.  There were several potholes which were 
several feet deep and were death traps for the athletes.   
148. The Committee observes that the prevailing condition demanded fresh replacement 
and laying of eight lane international sized synthetic athletic track so as to tide over the 
disarray of track and field facilities.  The grass field imposed inside the oval track also required 
immediate soil/sand filling accompanied with proper leveling and fresh laying of grass so as to 
give a world class look.  This area is very vital since other sports events like throws and jumping 
events are organized here.   
149. The Committee observes that the prevailing conditions have led to a sore point for 
players.  It was felt that this football ground needs a thorough upliftment befitting the 
international standard since Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium sports complex is well known multi-
purpose sports arena where several sports events like Asian Games in 1982, Asian 
Championship Athletics in 1989 and Commonwealth Games in 2010 were organized. 
150. The Committee further visited the football ground beside the main stadium, where 
selected budding players come for the practice session for football.  The Committee was 
anguished to find that the football ground is in unplayable condition as the maintenance was 
almost at the lowest ebb. It was also told that the field had not been maintained for the last 
one and half years. The CPWD Engineer present at the site told that they have not been given 
money for carrying out maintenance works. This ground was prepared at a cost of 2.50 crores 

and International pitch was laid.    Since no maintenance was carried out for so long, it was 
dusty and full of potholes and looked like drought affected agricultural field.   
 Members were very anguished to see the sad state of affairs.  The Committee 
impressed upon the Ministry to setup a high level inquiry and fix responsibility for omission 
and commission and send the report to the Committee within one month from the 
presentation of this report to the House.  The Committee also directs that upkeep, 
maintenance and administration must be handed over to responsible persons with 
professional experience. 
III. VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE TO CHENNAI, VISHAPATNAM, BHOPAL, UJJAIN 
AND INDORE 
(D) CHENNAI 
151. The representative of Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) submitted that the NLC Sports 
Control Board was formed in the year 1985 for the promotion of Sports. Around 250 sports 
persons were recruited during the period from 1985 to 1990.  However, further recruitment in 
sports quota could not be made due to over-manning, consequent to the closure of Fertilizer and 
B& C Factories and re-deployment to other units. 
152. NLC has spent nearly about 5.50 crores for the construction of three indoor shuttle 
courts and three swimming pools, including an International standard 50 M Swimming pool in 
Neyveli. NLC also has a Golf course, which celebrated its silver jubilee year in the year 2015.  NLC 
runs Sports School in partnership with the Sports Development Authority of Tamil Nadu and 
through which Athletics, Basketball and Football are promoted.  Nearly 100 School students 
belonging to various places in Tamil Nadu are under the care of NLC. Senior Sports employees are 
used as coaches in NLC Schools. 
153. NLC also organised the following sports events in their campus:- 
State Junior Basket Ball Championship 
State Junior Swimming Championship. 
State Junior Chess Championship. 
National Junior Football Championship. 
Thruvalluvar University women football tournament 
Tamil Nadu school games federation of India-Cycling competition. 

 
CHENNAI PETROLEUM CORPORATION LIMITED (CPCL) 
 
154. The representative of Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited (CPCL) submitted that it 
contributed an amount of 1,00,000/- to NSDF.  Apart from this, CPCL has been contributing to 
Petroleum Sports Promotion Board (PSPB) on yearly basis.  The details are given below: 
 
Year Amount Contributed 
( in lakhs) 
2012-13 5.80 
2013-14 7.02 
2014-15 6.00 
2015-16 4.22 
 
CPCL has made contributions for organizing the Chennai Open Tennis Tournament conducted by 
the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP).  CPCL contributed totally, an amount of 2.5 crore 
i.e., 50 lacs every year from 2005 onwards for five years. In addition, CPCL had contributed 15 
lacs for conducting the 7th Edition of the National Premier League Matches held by the All India 
Football Federation in the year 2002 and 10 lacs for conducting National Games in the 2003 to 
M/s. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. being the nodal agency. Since CPCL has incurred losses (Before 
Tax) consecutively for the last four financial years till 2014-15 no further significant contribution 
could be made. 
STATE BANK OF INDIA 
155. The representative of Local Head Office of State Bank of India, Chennai informed that SBI 
undertakes various activities to promote Sports. SBI has been allocating funds to the tune of 
3.00 crore on yearly basis out of the total Staff Welfare Fund specifically for holding Inter-circle 
Tournaments participated by own employees (among 14 Circles of the Bank) in the game Cricket, 
Football, Hockey, Basketball, Volleyball, Table Tennis.  This apart, additional fund required if any, 
are also allocated to meet the Circle's requirements for promotion/conduct of various other 
sporting activities at the local level.  Out of the present strength of 795 sportspersons in the 
Bank, 420 were recruited under sports quota.  The category-wise details of jobs are as under: 
Officers-214, Clerical-199, Sub-staff-7 Total - 420 
The Selection criteria for sportspersons are as under: 
1. Eligibility Norms: Age -  for all category staff-Between 18 and 26 years, Relaxation in 
age will be permitted in the case of reserved categories as per guidelines issued by the 

Government from time to time. 
2. Educational Qualifications: 
Officers : Graduation in any discipline. 
Clerical : SSC/SSLC/Matriculation or equivalent. 
Sub-staff : 5th Standard pass with ability to read and write. 
3. Sports Qualifications: 
Officers : Should have represented the country or won an Arjun Award or represented the 
State with distinction for at least five years in continuation. 
Clerical : Should have represented the State in National event, or the District in State level 
event or the University in an Inter-University event with distinction or if he was a member 
of the Combined Universities Team with distinction. 
Sub-staff : Should have represented the District in a State Level event or should have 
participated in a All India School event with distinction. 
Suitability and Selection: There is no examination, provided that sportspersons fulfil the 
eligibility criteria in respect of educational standards, age, etc. 
Provided that the sportsperson being considered for appointment has applied for the vacancy 
sanctioned by Corporate Centre keeping in view the ceiling fixed by the GOI for such 
appointments in a year. 
156. As per records available with the Bank it is not making any specific contributions to NSDF.  
However, during 2014-15, Bank has donated 15.00 lacs for promotion of sports under CSR.  
Apart from sponsoring sport's meets/ tournaments etc., Bank has donated a bus to Jude Felix 
Hockey Academy, Bangalore to facilitate the players to participate in various tournaments.  
During the Financial Year 2015-16 Bank has donated 2.21 crore for promotion of sports under 
CSR, out of which 2 crore has been donated to Mary Kom Regional Boxing Foundation, Manipur 
for construction of Boy's Hostel.  Incidentally, the said charitable Foundation is engaged in 
developing/grooming youth with potential from under-privileged background to become 
champions in the field of boxing.  Those selected are provided with free training, lodging, 
boarding, sports kit and all other related expenses. Large number of sports meets, competitions 
for differently-abled, various State level and National Level Championships etc. have also been 
sponsored by the Bank.  Few individuals like Kabyanil Talukdar, Gold Medallist, Rubik's Cube 
(Asia), Mr. Ralliantawana, for participation in World Badminton Championship have been 

supported by the Bank under CSR.  Besides, promoting rural sports, nationally recognized sports, 
Para-Olympic Sports and Olympic Sports, the Bank through its 14 Local Head Offices spread 
across the country, render support to various sports events and encourage individual talent in 
various games/sports. 
157. The Bank has also been sponsoring actively the Pro-Kabaddi tournament, which is 
organized every year at the National level.  The Bank has been very positive in encouraging rural 
sports, honouring sportsperson/players on the Bank day and also at the local level for their 
performances. The Sports Control Board (SCB) has been instrumental in providing the impetus to 
the spread of sports culture primarily through recruitment of successful sports personalities in 
various disciplines and nurturing the upcoming talents.  The Board has framed policies for 
recruitment of sportspersons in various games, namely, Cricket Football, Basketball, Volleyball, 
Hockey, Kabaddi and prescribed other facilities/benefits for promoting the cause of 
sportspersons (details given as under).  The Board also takes a review of various facilities 
provided to the sportspersons keeping in view the need from time to time.   
Benefits/Facilities available to Sportspersons 
158.  The Bank provides the facility of special leave to sportsperson employees for participating 
in the tournaments in the recognized games held at National/ International/ State, including 
Junior National levels and Veteran Sportsperson tournaments to the extent of 30 days at any one 
instance and maximum 180 days in a calendar year with additional leave for foreign tours and 
coaching camps. Requests for special leave to attend selection trials/ selection camps/ coaching 
camps/ physical training camps etc. held for selection of State/National teams are also 
considered. Leave of the above nature, beyond 30 days in one instance, is also sanctioned in 
deserving cases.  Employees who officiate as Coaches, Managers, Selectors, Referees, Judges, 
Umpires etc. in the Junior National/National/International level tournaments are also entitled to 
special leave. Active sportspersons are also given a reasonable time-off for practice during the 
season the game is played and the extent of time-off is determined according to the nature of 
the game. In addition, various facilities are extended to sportspersons, viz. weightage in 
promotion and consideration for one out-of-turn promotion, exemption from Rural and Semi-
urban (RUSU) assignments, for promotion to officers’ cadre up to certain grades, are in 

accordance with the guidelines issued by the GOI in 1992, financial assistance to handicapped 
Sportspersons etc.   
 
CANARA BANK  
 
159. The representative of Canara Bank submitted that Canara Bank, has been encouraging the 
sports fraternity. Canara Bank Sports Council at Head Office was setup in the year 1984 to 
monitor/encourage Sports in the Bank. The Sports Council at Head Office is responsible for 
growth of Sports and sportsperson in the Bank.  The Bank is sponsoring Teams in 6 Disciplines 
viz., Athletics (Women), Ball Badminton, Cricket, Hockey, Shuttle Badminton and Table Tennis. 
Bank is promoting the National Sports by way of identifying talented sports persons throughout 
the Country in various disciplines and by following due procedure wherein sports persons are 
recruited in the Bank under sports category.  Bank has so far recruited 77 sportspersons, out of 
which presently 40 are active players in 6 disciplines:  
Athletes 4, Hockey 12, Cricket 16, Ball Badminton 3, Shuttle Badminton and Table Tennis 3.  
160. The criteria for recruitment in various posts are as follows: -  
 Sub-staff - Passed in 10 th Standard but should not have passed 12th Standard. 
 SWOA (Clerk) - Graduation from a recognized University and Compulsory Computer 
knowledge. 
 Officer - Graduation from a recognized University and Compulsory Computer 
knowledge. 
161. Some of Sportspersons from the Bank have participated in the National and International 
tournaments/events and represented State/Country and brought laurels to the State/Country. 
Few personalities' names are given here below: 
 Ms. Shantha Rangaswamy (Rose to the level of General Manger)-Cricket (Ex-
International and Arjuna Awardee) 
 Shri B.K. Venkatesh Prased, DGM - Cricket (Ex-International and Arjuna Awardee)-ICC 
World Cup - 1996 &1999 
 Shri Sunil B.Joshi, Divisional Manager,-Cricket (Ex-International & Ekalavya Award). 
 Shri Bharat Chetri, Manager-Hockey (Ex-International, Ex-Olympian, Asian Games-Silver 
Medal, Comonwealth Games-Silver Medal and Junior World Cup- Gold Medal). 
 Smt. H.M. Jyothi, Manager - Athletics (International) (Asian Athletics-Bronze, 100Mts. 
and Commonwealth Games-Bronze 4x100 Mts. Relay) 
162. Apart from the Teams at Head Office, the Bank also sponsors Teams at Circle level for the 
local/regional/ Inter-Bank/Institutional Tournaments.  The performance is monitored by the 
respective Sports Council, nominated at the respective Circles. The Bank has been sanctioning 
sports budget every year to the Six Sponsored Teams at Head Office and to the Sports Councils at 

Circles for propagating sports/sporting activities. Talented students in the age group between 15 
to 21 years are taken under the scholarship scheme to represent the Bank's Team in various 
State/Inter-Bank Tournaments. Every year, approximately budget of 30 lacs is earmarked for 
sports activities.  For the financial year 2015-16, an amount of 26,30,352/- has been utilized for 
sports activities out of the budget of 30 lacs.  
The Bank submitted that for contribution to National Sports Development Fund (NSDF), it would 
be substantial and may require the specific guidelines/instructions from the Ministry of Finance.  
Moreover, since such contributions cannot be contributed under CSR activities, the Bank needs 
specific instructions from the Ministry of Finance to make such contributions. 
Promotion of Sports Tournaments: 
Bank was able to promote Sporting events at the State/National level:- 
 State Level Men and Women Ball Badminton Tournament at Huliyar, Tumakuru Distric, 
Karnataka in the year 2011-12 where more than 200 players participated. 
 State Level Ball Badminton Tournament for Men was Co-sponsored by Bank during 2013 
and 2015 in Mysuru, 2014 in Bellary. 
 Inter-State Zonal Ball Badminton Championship held at Chanarayapatna, Hassan District, 
was also Co-Sponsored by Bank during 2015. 
 All India Jawahar Lal Nehru Memorial Hockey Tournament held at New Delhi, was co-
sponsored by the Bank during the year 2013-14 and 2015. 
 All India Beighton Cup Hockey Tournament held at Kolkata, which is one of the oldest 
sporting events in the World, was also co-sponsored by the Bank during the year 2014 
and 2015. 
 Bank was the main Sponsor of the All India Senior Ranking Shuttle Badminton 
Tournament held at Bangalore during 2014. 
 Bank was the main Sponsor of the Karnataka State Junior and Senior State Athletic meet 
held at Bangalore during 2015.   
163. Indian Banks Association formed BSB (Bank sports Board) to cater to the needs of sports 
persons working in Banks.  Bank Sports Board framed policies with regard to facilities for sports 
persons.  After the closure of Bank Sports Board in 2008, Banks had the discretion to frame their 
own policy.  But, Bank is following and practicing the guidelines framed by the erstwhile Bank 
Sports Board.  The details of the guidelines of the Bank Spots Board are as follows:- 
 Special Leave: Whenever any sports person represents the Bank team in any tournament 
at the State/National level, they are provided with 75 days of special leave in a calendar 
year. 
 Duty Leave: Whenever any sports person represents the State/Country in any 
tournament at the National/International level, they are provided with duty leave without 
any ceiling limit, including pre-participation coaching camps. 
 Time-Off Facility: Whenever any player of Bank teams is going to participate in any 
tournaments at State/National level, they are provided with additional time-off facility to 
have enough practice and prepare well for the tournaments scheduled. 

 Increments: Sports persons who have achieved excellence in tournaments at 
National/International level will be eligible for increments for his/her performance.  One 
increment for excelling at the National level and two increments for excelling at the 
International level in a year.  The total number of increments to be awarded to an 
individual shall not exceed five in his/her entire career. 
 Special Leave Coaching: Players/Employees of the Bank, who take up coaching for 
the District/State/Zone/Country in tournaments including pre-participating coaching 
camps, are provided with 45 days of special leave in a calendar year. 
 Injuries: Whenever any player gets injured, he/she is permitted 100% medical 
reimbursement along with the treatment prescribed by the Doctor treating the injury.  
Depending upon the seriousness of the injury and medical certificate given by the Doctor 
necessary leave is also permitted. 
 Country/Premier Leagues: Players are permitted to play in overseas professional 
league matches to get exposure to the conditions which in turn will help them in 
improving their game.  The Bank provides them Extra Ordinary Leave on Loss of Pay for a 
period not more than 02 years in their entire service career. 
 Out-of-turn Promotion: Players are eligible for out-of-turn promotion, if they 
participate in highly rated International events like Olympic Games, Asian Games, World 
Cup Tournaments, Commonwealth Games, SAARC Games, SAF Games, Champions Trophy 
Tournaments and Cricket Test Series. These are events which are held once in four years 
or biannually with the exception of Cricket.  At National Level, the player should have 
represented the State for five years and should have two medal winning performances.  
So far, Bank has given 50 out-of-turn promotions to sportspersons who have been 
recruited under sports category. 
 TA/HA: Bank provides TA/HA to the players who represented the Bank teams in 
the tournament at the State/National level.  Even, when players are representing the 
State teams TA/HA is provided by the Bank, subject to the condition that the State 
Association is not providing any facilities. 
 Scholarship: Talented young players between the ages of 18-21 years are enrolled in the 
scheme of scholarship formulated by Bank. As per the requirement of the teams, 
scholarship players are provided to the teams. 
 Recruitment: As per the Recruitment policy approved by the Board of Director. 
 Out of Pocket Expenses: Whenever players represents the Bank teams in 
tournaments at State level, they are provided with OPE (Out of Pocket Expenses) to cater 
to their dietary supplements during the competitions. 
 
 
INDIAN OVERSEAS BANK 
 
164. Indian Overseas Bank is actively engaged in promotion of Sports and Games and at 
present, there are 61 active sportsmen working in the Bank, who have been recruited, under 
Sports Quota. in various categories - Officer Cadre, Clerical and Sub Staff Cadre depending on 
their Age, Educational Qualification and Sports Qualification (Credentials). For facilitating Sports 
Activities, each year, a Sports Budget is placed before the Bank for its approval. The following are 
funds earmarked for the last three financial years: - 

   
April, 2013 to March, 2014 April, 2014 to March, 2015 April, 2015 to March, 2016 
 
1,37,00,000 
 
1,50,00,000 65,00,000 
Indian Overseas Bank has regular teams in the following disciplines- 
1. Ball Badminton  
2. Basketball  
3. Cricket  
4. Hockey  
5. Volleyball 
165. The meritorious Sportsmen are recruited only on complying with norms specified for 
recruitment under sports quota, with regard to their Age, Educational Qualification and 
Outstanding performance at the National/International Level as per the policy approved by the 
Bank's Board. These Sportspersons are given permission for regular practice and On Duty Leave 
for representing Bank Team/State Team/Indian Team at the National/International level. Sports 
activities of the Bank are monitored by the Sports Board of the Bank, which comprises of three 
General Managers (includes General Manager, Personnel, who is the Secretary of the Sports 
Board), One Asstt. General Manager (PAD/HADD), One Representative each from the officers 
Association/Union. All Policy decisions with regard to expenditure, recruitment, promotions, 
incentives and other matters relating to sports are finalized in the Sports Board and 
recommended to ED/CMD for approval, wherever necessary. Recruitment of outstanding 
sportspersons is done from all over the Country, irrespective of the region, taking into 
consideration only the merits of the performance of the sports person at the 
National/International Level. 
166. Besides considering sponsorship of sports persons/events selectively, the Bank also 
identify and promote junior talent in games like Cricket, Hockey and /volleyball by utilizing them 
as Guest Players and also remunerating them, according to their achievements/performance in 
sports. The representative of the Bank, however, submitted that it has not made any contribution 
to the National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) during the last three years. 
 
  

(E) VISHAKAPATNAM 
RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED 
167. The representatives of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) submitted that it has been 
contributing and sponsoring individual players/sports meets & events in various Sports & Games.  
However, no specific contributions have been made to NSDF.  RINL has been sponsoring 
Individual Players representing the Country in Sports and Games like Roller Skating, Shuttle, 
Badminton, Power Lifting etc.  Further, RINL was operating a National Volleyball Academy from 
the year 1996 to 1999.  Due to financial constraints during that period of time, the Academy 
could not continue.  The projects for promotion of sports under CSR are taken up on need basis 
in line with the provisions of Schedule-VII of Companies Act, 2013.  Other activities taken up for 
providing encouragement of Sportspersons are given below: 
 Infrastructural support for conduct of AP Revenue Sports Meet 2015. 
 Sports activities for Differently-abled children-2014. 
 Sports Activities for Differently-abled children at Ukku stadium-2013. 
 4th Vizag Steel Cup Football tournament-2013. 
 24th AP Inter-District roller Hockey Championship-2012. 
 Dr. Ambedkar Memorial National Boxing Championship-2012. 
 4th Inter Zonal Women National Boxing Championship, Vizak 2012. 
 Invitation Hockey tournament, Vizag-2012. 
 Inter Club Football Championship-Vizak Steel Cup-2011. 
 State level Senior Men & Women Badminton Championship 2011. 
 Invitation Hockey tournament, Vizag-2011. 
 Inter-Steel (SPSB) Football Championship at Ukkunagaram-2011. 
 7th National Hobby 16 Sailing Championship-2011. 
168. The Committee was informed that projects for promotion of sports are taken up on need 
basis in line with the provisions of Schedule VII of Companies Act, 2013 and overall CSR budget.  
RINL has formulated a set of rules and procedures relating to the functioning of Sports Council of 
RINL which advises the Sports Department regarding the various activities relating to Sports in 
RINL-VSP.   
169.  With regard to the recruitment of Sportspersons, RINL is following Guidelines/ 
Instructions laid down by DoPT vide OM No. 14034/01/2013-Estt.(D) dated 3rd October, 2013 in 
Group C & D, such as providing age relaxation up to 5 years, over and above the relaxations 
applicable in respective categories. As on date, 22 Sportspersons have been recruited in RINL till 

date. Out of these 22 sportspersons recruited, 13 are on the rolls and their category-wise 
breakup is as given below: 
 (i) Body Building -  1 
 (ii) Boxing          -   1 
 (iii) Cricket  -   1 
 (iv) Shuttle Badminton  -  2 
 (v) Volleyball   -   8 
  Total    -   13   
170. They further informed that induction of manpower in RINL is governed by the Company’s 
Recruitment Policy, under which recruitment to posts in the non-executive cadre is done through 
Employment Exchange and Press Advertisement as and when there is need for induction of 
manpower.  RINL is giving relaxation to Meritorious Sportspersons for Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts, as 
per DoPT guidelines.  Candidates who fulfill the prescribed eligibility criteria are considered for 
selection, if they apply against any advertisement or their names are sponsored by Employment 
Exchange against any Employment Notification.   
171. They further added that RINL is a member of the Steel Plants Sports Board (SPSB) in which 
all Public Sector and some of the Private Sector Steel Plants are the members.  Each year RINL 
contributes a sum of Rs. 5 lakhs to the SPCB, which conducts Inter steel Championships in 12 
disciplines, viz. Athletics, Boxing, Badminton, Basketball, Cricket, Chess, Football, Kabaddi, 
Hockey, Volleyball, Roller Skating, Throw Ball and Weight Lifting.  RINL is having a full-fledged 
Sports Department to monitor Sports Activities.   The Sports Department is headed by an Asst. 
General Manager with adequate support staff.  RINL is also having a Sports Committee, a 
bipartite forum which is an advisory body for sports related activities.  With regard to the 
recruitment of Sportspersons from Tribal Regions for Group C & D Posts, RINL-VSP is seeking list 
of sponsor eligible candidates from ITDA, Paderu, which is a tribal area near Vishakhapatnam, 
including Meritorious Sports Persons (MSPs), though RINL has not recruited specifically from 
North East Region. 
HINDUSTAN SHIPYARD LIMITED (HSL) 
172. Hindustan Shipyard Limited (HSL) has been incurring losses for the last several years.  As 
such, due to financial constraints it is not in a position to allocate any funds to NSDF (National 
Sports Development Fund). HSL is facing severe financial crunch and hence not adopted any SAI 
centre/events etc and none of the employees of HSL have represented in International events 

nor HSL has sponsored any individual players.  HSL is incurring losses and have a negative net 
worth of Rs.1,0023.29 crores as on 31st March 2015 and hence not mandated to allocate any 
funds towards CSR activities.  However, a meagre amount is spent towards CSR activities like 
medical camps, blood donation, Swachh Bharat activities 
173. HSL has not framed any definite Sports policy. However, as per HSL’s Recruitment Rules, 
under the heading sources of Recruitment, the candidates under the category of meritorious  
sports persons of State/National/International/Inter-University level, need not come through 
employment exchange subject to satisfying the qualification, experience and other requirements 
of the posts and are found suitable. In addition to the above, for games, sports, NCC, extra-
curricular activities, due weightage is given to these categories of candidates. At present all the 
vacancies in the HSL are not being filled up but only those vacancies, which are absolutely 
necessary to meet the requirements of on-going projects are being filled up.  Whenever 
recruitment action is taken, the concession provided as above for sports persons are being 
extended.  HSL has not set up any Sports Promotion Board. However, certain concessions like 
granting of special casual leave to the employees participating in sports events are being 
extended to encourage employees to participate in various sports events. 
STATE BANK OF HYDERABAD 
 
174. The representatives of State Bank of Hyderabad (SBH) informed that their Bank is one of 
the first Public Sector Banks to recruit sportsmen mainly in cricket and football over the years on 
an ongoing basis.  The present strength of cricket team is 18 and that of football team is 15.   The 
Bank was recruiting outstanding sportspersons as and when vacancy arises for their Cricket and 
Football teams and eight Football players in the month of June, 2014 were recruited.  
International players like Sri Abid Ali, Sri Ambati Rayudu and Sri Pragyan Ojha were also recruited 
in Bank’s Cricket team and 6 of the Bank’s Cricket players Sri T. Suman, Sri B Sumanth, Sri Akash 
Bhandari, Sri Anirudh Singh (Deccan Charger), Sri A T Rayudu  (Mumbai Indians), Sri Syed Ahmed  
Quadri Gazi (Rajsthan Royals) have represented in IPL matches. Smt. Mulini Reddy, International 
Volleyball player and 1st woman Arjun Awardee of the State and Sri Anil Mishra, State Table 
Tennis Player, were also recruited by the Bank under sports quota.  The expenditure incurred by 
Sportsperson for participating in the tournaments are borne by the Bank.  The Bank has incurred 
an amount of Rs. 15,16,918/- towards participation of Bank’s Cricket and Football teams in 

various tournaments during the year 2015-16 and an amount of Rs. 5,38.212/- during the year 
2016-17 so far.  The cost of sports material (kits etc.) for Cricket and Football teams is also borne 
by the Bank.  The Bank has incurred an amount of 4,21,534/- for providing sports material to 
Bank’s Cricket Team in 2015 and an amount of 1,96,737/- for football team in 2016.  
175. The representatives further added that Bank has contributed an amount of 20,00,000/- 
for conducting Badminton Asia Team Championship-2016. The Bank had sponsored an amount of 
3,00,000/- to “ Deaf Enabled Foundation”, Hyderabad for organizing 20th National Games for the 
Deaf.  It has contributed an amount of 1,00,000/- to Telangana Football Association, Hyderabad 
for conducting a Football tournament.  Financial assistance of 1,00,000/- was provided for 
organizing an Inter-School sports competitions for the blind students on the eve of Children’s 
Day. State Bank of Hyderabad has donated 1,00,000/- to “ Secure Giving” an independent non-
profit charitable trust.  An amount of 15,000/- was given to Badminton Association of Telangana 
for organizing Badminton tournaments. 
176. Regarding the recruitment of Sportsperson in the Bank and their promotions, the 
representative of State Bank of Hyderabad submitted that the Bank has recruited 115 
Sportspersons in the Bank’s Cricket (51 players) and Football (64 players) teams so far. Further, 
the Bank has already framed their Policy and guidelines for recruitment and promotion of 
Sportspersons in the Bank. The following criteria have been fixed for selection at various posts in 
the Bank:- 
Sub-Ordinate posts: 
Sportspersons who are in the age group of 18-26 years and having educational qualification 
of 5th standard and above but non-Matriculate and who have represented District at State 
level competitions or participated in All India School events are eligible for applying for Sub-
ordinate posts in the Bank. 
Clerical Posts: 
Sportspersons who are in the age group of 18-26 years and having education qualification of 
pass in SSC/SSLC/Matriculate or equivalent and who have represented State at National Level 
competitions or participated at ‘Inter-University level’  are eligible for applying for clerical 
posts in the Bank. 
  

Officer Posts: 
Sportspersons who are in the age group of 18-26 years and having education qualification of 
graduation in any  discipline and who have represented Country at International level are 
eligible for applying for Officer posts in the Bank.   
177. Guidelines for recruitment and promotion of sportspersons 
i)  Sports proficiency in Cricket and Football games are considered for recruitment in the 
Bank.  There is no examination, provided the sportsmen fulfill the eligibility criteria in respect of 
educational standards, age etc.  The candidates will be interviewed and selected, subject to their 
completing the other formalities such as satisfactory reports from Coaches and Recruitment 
Committee, Medical Examination and verification of antecedents etc.  Sportspersons employees, 
who are recruited under sports quota, are given the following relaxations, wherever such 
promotion involves written examination and/or interview.  Sportspersons are given a relaxation 
of 5% in qualifying marks for the written test while they appear for promotions.  An additional 
10% marks are given to them in the interview for promotions. 
ii) Sportspersons representing the Country at International level or representing the state 
continuously for a minimum period of 5 years after joining the Bank at the National level in any 
recognized sport are being considered for out-of-turn promotion.  Such promotions are given 
once in the entire service of the sportspersons employee.  The Bank has promoted 18 players of 
Bank’s cricket and football teams on the basis of their sports achievements under out-of-turn 
promotion policy.  17 players were promoted from Clerical to Officer Cadres and 1 player from 
Subordinate to Clerical cadre.  Employees recruited under sports quota are not required to fulfill 
the obligation of completing rural or semi-urban service wherever necessary as long as they are 
active National /International players and/or playing for the Bank.  However, these stipulations 
are to be fulfilled once they cease to be active players.  
178. The representative of SBH, however, submitted that the Bank has not contributed to the 
NSDF as they have been sponsoring and promoting Sports and Sportspersons on their own. 
Further, on a specific query, it was informed that SBH has no presence in the North East Region 
and Tribal Regions of the Country.  However, the Bank’s Sports Recruitment is on all India basis.  
ANDHRA BANK 
179. The Andhra Bank recruited sports persons with good track record. It has a cricket team of 
16 players recruited under sports category, a Kabaddi team of 11 players recruited under sports 

category. It has recruited 5 chess players under sports quota and it has also recruited one sports 
man representing sailing sports. The expenditure for the year 2013-14 is Rs. 3,42,423/-, 2014-15 
is 3,48,296/- and 2015-16 is 7,62,314/-. The Bank has also given donations/ sponsorship 
amounting to Rs. 11,22,000/- for various Sporting Events, Sports Kits etc. The sports persons are 
permitted time off for practice and special leave for tournaments. Match allowance, travelling 
expenses and boarding expenses are also reimbursed by the Bank as per eligibility in the 
respective scale/cadre to all these players when they represent the Bank. As per Banks Sports 
Board guidelines, Bank is providing Sports kit-Clothing, sports equipment to players once in 2 
years. The representative of Andhra Bank informed that it has neither contributed to NSDF nor 
adopted any Sports Centre as it has not received any request from the SAI or the Department of 
Sports in this regard. 
INDIAN BANK 
180. Indian Bank has recruited more than 200 sports persons. There are 50 International 
players of the Bank, who have represented the Country in junior and senior International sports 
events. The Bank has teams in the following disciplines viz., Athletics, Basket Ball, Cricket, 
Football, Hockey and Volleyball, which participates in various State and National level 
tournaments. The expenditure incurred by the Bank for development of sports in the last three 
years are as follows:- 
Year Amount in Rs. (in Lacs) 
2014-15 48 
2015-16 44.17 
2016-17 60 
 
The criteria for recruitment of Sportspersons in the Bank are as follows: 
For Officer cadre: 
Besides fulfilling minimum educational qualification for the post, he/she should have represented 
the Country or won Arjuna Award or represented the State with distinction for at least 5 years in 
continuation. 
  

For Clerical Cadre: 
Besides fulfilling minimum educational qualification for the post, he/she should have represented 
the State in National events or District in the State level events with distinction, or in an inter-
University event with distinction or member of combined Universities team.  
The Bank is having regular teams in Athletics, Basketball, Cricket, Football, Hockey and Volley 
ball. The Bank has a Central Sports Committee headed by a General Manager and represented by 
Executive from Human Resource Management Department and Sportspersons of the Bank.  The 
Committee is monitoring sports activities and recommends for any improvements to the top 
management.  
 The Indian Bank submitted that it was facing the following constraints in development of 
sports in NE-region. 
(a) Limited presence in the Region; and  
(b) Limited number of employees from NE region. 
The representative of the Bank further added National Sports Policy has two main objectives viz., 
promotion of excellence in sports and broad basing of sports. In tune with the same, Bank is 
promoting sports activities by encouraging its own employees, who have been hired under sports 
category and by training the upcoming sports-persons by engaging them in Bank’s team by 
engaging stipend/guest players from schools and colleges. However, it was submitted that no 
contributions has been made to the NSDF. 
 
SYNDICATE BANK 
181. The representatives of the Syndicate Bank submitted that promotion and recruitments of 
Sportspersons are done as per Govt./BSB of IBA policy duly approved.  The following are the 
details of the amount spent on development Sports in the last three years:-   
            
Period Amount (Rs. in Lakhs) 
2013-14 21.75 
2014-15 17.85 
2015-16 34.77 
 
  

As regards the recruitment of Sportspersons in the Bank, the following are the category- 
wise/cadre-wise sportspersons appointed in the Bank : - 
 
Grade Number 
Officers/Executive 85 
Workmen 97 
 
 The Bank is directly contributing to the development of various sports events through 
their Regional Centres located across the Country by sponsoring various events on a case-to-case 
basis. Over the past three years, the amount spent by the bank is over Rs 50 lakhs.  The 
representative, however, added that the Bank has not recruited any sportspersons during the 
recent years and hence there are no sports teams of the Bank at present.  It was further added 
that the Bank was strictly following the instructions continued in the Office Memorandum. F. No. 
14034/01/2013-Estt.(D) dated 03.10.2013 issued by Government of India, Ministry of Personnel, 
Public Grievances and Pensions.  
The Bank further added that an employee recruited on sports quota, or representing the Bank in 
sports, will be considered for out-of-turn promotion, if he represents the State at a National 
Events for 5 years and has a medal winning performances either as a winner or a runners-up in a 
team or individual event having played at the National level for 5 years not necessarily in 
successive Nationals. 
182. The Committee is disheartened to note that PSUs/PSBs are not taking the issue 
seriously as negligible improvement is seen in the performance of NSDF and other pro-Sports 
initiatives espoused by the Committee. The Committee, therefore, urges to various 
Departments of the Government of India like Department of Defence Production, under whom 
many of the major PSUs of the Country operate, to consider supporting Sports either in the 
form of contribution to NSDF or adopting some SAI Centre as well as recruitment of 
Sportspersons in such organizations, which would go a long way in sending the right message 
to the Corporate world. 
183. The Committee also recommends that Banks should step out and provide the last mile 
connection to the raw talents in the rural and Tribal areas as they have the local presence 

through their Branches. Thus, Banks can, in co-ordination with SAI, identify such young talents 
and they could be nurtured further as this is where the real Indian Sports reside.  
(F)  BHOPAL 
CENTRAL BANK OF INDIA 
184. The Committee interacted with PSUs and PSBs in Bhopal. The representative if the Central 
Bank of India submitted that the Bank is proactive in promoting sports activity and as a part of 
this endeavor an apex level Bank Recreation Club has been set up at their Corporate Office with 
one of the executive in the rank of General Manager as Chairman, one Deputy General Manager 
as Vice-President of Recreation Club.  This apart, the Bank has extended various facilities like 
Duty concession/Time Off, Duty/Special Leave, permission to participate in various 
tournaments/matches/events etc. to members of staff for sports including Tracking/ 
Mountaineering etc., through well-defined guidelines.  Further, there are provisions in the 
Promotion Policy for officers and staff for out-of-turn promotion if their sports performance 
meets with certain criteria as laid down therein and even for 2nd out-of-turn promotion, in case of 
exemplary sports performance in recognized Sports activities. These guidelines also have 
provision for Out-of-turn increments for deserving sportspersons.  The Bank further added that 
the sports activities promote competitive spirit among the staff.  Bank has been earmarking 
sufficient funds on year-to-year basis for expending on sports and cultural activities as a part of 
staff welfare and year-wise break is  
2011-12  : 25.00lacs 
2012-13  : 15.00 lacs 
2013-14  : 20.00 lacs 
185. The Bank further added that no Sportspersons have been recruited from outside in the 
recent part.  They further added that till date Bank had not contributed to NSDF so far as the 
Bank had been promoting sports in big way through its own team in the discipline of cricket, 
football, Hockey, Kabaddi, and Volleyball.  Further, the Bank regularly allocates budget to its 
zones for sponsoring Rural Sports/competitions in various parts of the Country.  On the 
promotion of sports in rural areas, Central Bank of India (CBI) submitted that in Jabalpur, they 
were organizing sports programme for disabled children.  They also organized a Kite flying 
competition in Ujjain and boat sailing competition at Mandsore Dam.  The Bank also sponsored 
the Junior Tennis Tournament organized by International Tennis Federation and distributed 

awards to winners.  They further added the Bank has regular teams in Football, Hockey, Kabbadi, 
Cricket and Volleyball with in-service talents. 
 
186. The Bank further added that it had supported and encouraged young sporting talents to 
excel in their sporting career in North Eastern Region by sponsoring various sporting activities like 
Athletics, Kabbadi, Badminton, Cricket, Football, Volleyball, Table Tennis, Polo etc.  However, 
they had not recruited any sportspersons from North Eastern Region. 
 
BANK OF INDIA 
187. The representative of Bank of India submitted that BOI has recruited more than 100 
sportspersons in the past, who have represented in State/National or International level 
tournaments in various sports activities viz. Cricket, Football Kabbadi, Carrom, Kho-Kho, Athletics, 
Badminton etc. For promoting sports activities, the Bank has been conducting various 
tournaments on All India basis in different streams every year in these Sports. Besides the Bank 
grants Duty Leave to the sportspersons for participating in various sports events at State, 
National and International level. In addition, sportspersons are being extended relaxed working 
hours and Duty Leave for pre-tournament practice also. Further, reimbursement of travelling 
expenses and payment of Diem allowances is made to them whenever they are participating in 
sports tournaments. The Bank also provides Sportspersons with kits related to the sports, 
wherever required. 
188. The Bank has established Zonal Sports Committees at each Zone, which takes care of 
sports activity in the Zones.  In addition to that, Bank has established Sports Control Board at 
apex level. Bank also engages sportspersons in the age group of 18 to 21 years on monthly 
scholarship basis.  Presently, the Bank has engaged 20 sportspersons on scholarship basis.  They 
are being paid monthly stipend of 6000/- p.m. and they have also been insured for 2.00 lakhs 
against accidental injury. 
 
189. The Bank has been recruiting sportspersons, who have represented in State/National or 
International level tournaments in various sports activities viz. cricket, football, kabbadi, carom, 
kho-kho, athletics, badminton etc. The Bank has various regular teams in different streams in 
which sportspersons of repute are selected.  They are very instrumental to promote the Bank's 
reputation at National/International level. 
 

190. The Bank of India submitted they were following the guidelines of Banks' Sports Control 
Board of IBA for promotion of sports. At Bank level, Sports Control Board is at apex level which is 
presided by a General Manager and two persons each from Officers' Association and Staff Union 
to represent in the said Board. In the year 2016-17, 40.00 lakhs were allotted for conduct of 
sports activities at various Zones of the Bank. The Bank has recently held Cricket tournament at 
Indore.  Besides this, funds are allocated to individual Zones for conduct of sports activities at 
Zonal level.  As recommended by the Bank's Sports Control Board, the Bank recruits 
sportspersons in the Bank after seeking Board approval. Besides, the Bank also granted out-of-
turn increments to around 115 sportspersons for participation in National events and out-of-turn 
promotion was given to the sportspersons for representing India in International events. 
 
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK (PNB) 
191. The representative of the Local Head Office of Punjab National Bank, Bhopal submitted 
that PNB has established PNB Hockey Academy in September, 2002 to promote National sport of 
Hockey.  PNB Hockey Academy has two teams-Junior team of 25 players, in the age group of 14-
18 and senior team of 25 players, above 18 years of age as employees.   
Junior Team: Bank is providing boarding and lodging, training through professional coach, playing 
kits, dietician, doctor, transportation, insurance facilities and monthly stipend to junior players. 
Senior Team: Senior team players are all permanent employees of the Bank.  Recruited in clerical 
cadre, players have opportunity to take further promotions.  Presently, the Bank has 5 players in 
the officers’ grade. 
192. Bank has a Board approved policy for recruitment of sports persons since 2002.  In terms 
of the said policy, Bank has so far recruited 39 sports persons as Hockey Players (Male) in clerical 
cadre.  Out of these 39 Sportsperson, 23 are still playing for Sr. Hockey Team of the Bank and 5 of 
them have since been promoted to Officers’ Cadre and present strength of sports persons in 
clerical cadre is 18.  Recruitment of another 8 players in the year 2016-17 is in process. Bank has 
started Hockey Academy in the year 2002, for promotion of National sport of Hockey.  Bank has 
allocated separate budget for the Hockey Academy.  For the financial year 2016-17, a total 
budget of 2.20 crore has been allocated for Hockey Academy.  Out of this, a budget of 1.27 
crore has been allocated for senior hockey team and a budget of 0.93 crore has been allocated 
for junior hockey team.  During last year i.e. 2015-16, against a budget of 0.96 crore, an amount 
of 0.68 crore has been spent for Senior Hockey Team and against a budget of 0.73 crore, 0.46 

crore has been spent on Junior Team up to March, 2016. Major components of senior hockey 
team budget are playing kit and equipment for players, travelling allowance, diet money and 
conveyance expenses, ground rent charges, medical expenses, insurance of players, incentives 
etc.  Major components of junior hockey team budget are mess charges, playing kit, stipend to 
players, medical expenses, transportation, insurance etc. Besides these, Senior players are 
provided specialized training facility through trained coaches and they are also given daily diet 
allowance, playing kits, dietician, doctor, physiotherapist, travelling allowance (on tour), 
insurance coverage etc.  
 
193. PNB selects players in junior and senior hockey teams through National advertisements 
and the best available talents are selected through trials, judged by professionals of Sports 
Authority of India, International coaches etc. Players selected under sports quota remains as 
sports person till their active sporting years and are absorbed in mainstream of service upon his 
leaving the sport. Bank releases notification through National dailies besides uploading the same 
on the Bank's website.  For wider circulation, window advertisement is also released in all India 
papers and in local dailies published from states like North East, Odisha and Madhya Pradesh etc. 
so as to include representation from all regions including of North East Region and Tribal regions. 
Bank has recruited 5 players from tribal areas, presently there are 3 such players in the senior 
Hockey team. However, it was informed that PNB has not been contributing to the NSDF as it is 
already spending much on its own Sports activities. 
 
ALLAHABAD BANK 
 
194. The Allahabad Bank representative submitted that the Bank has not earmarked any 
specific percentage of funds for development of sports and no contributions were made by it to 
the NSDF. However, the Bank has incurred expenses for conducting Inter-Office Football, Cricket 
and Basketball tournaments during the last few years as under:- 
1. 2013-14, Expenditure on sports 11.43 lakhs 
2. 2012-12, Expenditure on sports 10.39 lakhs 
3. 2011-12, Expenditure on sports 4.08 lakhs  
 
195. The Bank has recruited 16 sportspersons based on their outstanding performance at 
National Level.  In terms of Chapter VII, para-5 of their Recruitment Policy, recruitment of 
meritorious and outstanding sports persons will be made from time to time in terms of 
Government guidelines subject to the vacancies available as per manpower plan approved by the 

Board of Directors of the Bank. Out of the 16 sportspersons recruited by the Bank, 3 were 
recruited in Officers’ cadre, 12 in Clerical cadre and 1 recruited in Sub-staff cadre. Subsequently, 
5 more sportspersons were promoted to Officers’ cadre. 
196. The Committee was informed that the Bank used to have regular teams comprising 
eminent sportspersons, but at present the Bank does not have any regular teams in sports.  
However, for promoting sports in Bank, the following facilities are provided to the existing 
staff/officers employed as sportspersons: 
1. Time-Off facilities for two hours: (both in the morning and evening) to sports persons 
(employees) of Bank to attend the practice session for participation in the Inter-Office 
Football and Cricket tournaments. 
2. Outstation Officer/Employees are treated on duty for the Match Day to participate the 
Inter-Office tournaments. 
3. Applicable TA/DA also given as per their entitlement. 
4. Special Casual Leave for a period not exceeding 30 days in a calendar year is allowed to 
the outstanding sportsmen i.e., National Level Players and State Level Players for 
participating/coaching/attending training camps. 
5. Special Casual Leave not exceeding 10 days in a calendar year is also allowed for 
participating Inter-Zonal/Bank tournaments.  Employees who are selected for 
participating in sports event of National/International importance, the period of actual 
days on which they participate in the events as also the time spent in travelling to and fro 
of such tournaments is being treated as on duty. 
 
197. The representative of the Bank informed that after winding-up of Banks Sports Board 
(BSB) in May, 2008, IBA vide their letter HR&IR/PM/ALL/748/6016 dated 14.6.2012 has advised 
the Banks to take decision on sports matters in accordance with the Government guidelines and 
policy approved by the Bank's Board.  Presently, there is a sports cell in Bank looking after 
promotion of sports. In the year 2014, sports employee Shri Biswajeet Bhattacharya on invitation 
from Assam Football Association was nominated as Chief Coach for the selection- cum-coaching 
camp of the senior National Football Championship for Santosh Trophy, 2013-14 held at 
Morigaon, Assam.  Bank is also promoting Inter-Zonal Football and Cricket tournaments at 
regular intervals of time but it has no interface activity with Sports University in the North East 
Region. It was submitted that the Bank’s sports policy is guided by the Government of India 
National Sports Policy-2001 
 
198. The State Bank of India, Local Head Office, Bhopal submitted that it has been allocating 
funds to the tune of 3.00 crore on yearly basis out of the total Staff Welfare Fund specifically for 

holding Inter-Cricle Tournaments participated by own employees (among 14 Circles of the Bank) 
in the game of Cricket, Football, Hockey, Basketball, Volleyball, Table Tennis.  This apart, 
additional fund required if any, are also allocated to meet the Circle's requirements for 
promotion/conduct of various other sporting activities at the local level.  The National Sports 
Development Fund (NSDF) was established by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports in 1998 
with the objective of mobilizing resources from non-government resources, including 
private/public sector and non-resident Indians for the promotion of sports and games in the 
country.  The fund available under NSDF are mainly used towards supplementing government 
assistance to the elite sportspersons who are medal prospects at major international events, for 
meeting their specific coaching/training requirements by way of provision of scientific support 
and training within the country and abroad, purchase of equipment, participation in international 
competitions, etc. 
199. The Bank does not have any separate policy for places where it is the lead Bank.  
However, the Bank has been very positive in encouraging rural sports, honouring sportspersons/ 
players on the Bank day and also at the local level for their performance. The Bank's regular 
teams in the various games, viz.  Cricket, Football, Hockey etc. are represented by its own 
players, either recruited under sports consideration/quota or otherwise.  The various facilities 
extended to the sportspersons, viz, special leave for participation in various tournaments at the 
State /National/International level, weightage in promotion and consideration for one out-of-
turn promotion, exemption from Rural and Semi-urban (RUSU) assignments for promotion to 
officer's cadre up to certain grades are in accordance with the guidelines issued by the 
Government of India. The sports policy of the Bank for promotion of sports across the country 
has been formulated in accordance with the guidelines issued by the GOI in 1992.  The Sports 
Control Board (SCB) is the apex sports body/authority of the Bank and it came into existence in 
the year 1963 with the objective to encourage, promote, develop, maintain and regulate sports 
and games in SBI.  The SCB has been instrumental in providing the impetus to the spread of 
sports culture primarily through recruitment of successful sports personalities in various 
disciplines and nurturing the upcoming talents.  The Board in its meeting decides the particular 
type of Inter Circle sports and games to be organized, the time schedule to the followed, the 
venue for the meets and allocate such amounts as may be needed for the purpose.  The Board 
has framed policies for recruitment of sportspersons in various games, namely, Cricket, Football, 

Basketball, Volleyball, Hockey, Kabaddi and prescribed other facilities/benefits for promoting the 
cause of sportspersons (details given as under).  The Board also takes a review of various facilities 
provided to the sportspersons keeping in view the need from time to time.  Inter-circle 
tournaments relating to sportsperson employees of the Bank were successfully conducted by the 
Sports Control Board during 2013-14 in six games.  This was followed up by similar conduct of 
tournaments at the Circles in six games during 2014-15 and in five games during 2015-16. 
 
200. The Bank provides the facility of special leave to sportsperson employees for participating 
in the tournaments in the recognized games held at National/International/State, including 
Junior National level and Veteran Sportsperson tournaments to the extent of 30 days at any one 
instance and maximum 180 days in a calendar year with additional leave for foreign tours and 
coaching camps. Requests for special leave to attend selection trials/selection camps/coaching 
camps/physical training camps etc. held for selection of State/National teams are also 
considered.  Leave of the above nature beyond 30 days in one instance is also sanctioned in 
deserving cases.  Employees who officiate as Coaches, Managers, Selectors, Referees, Judges, 
Umpires etc. in the Junior National/National/International level tournaments are also entitled to 
special leave. Active sportspersons are also given a reasonable time off for practice during the 
season the game is played and the extent of time off is determined according to the nature of the 
game. Sportspersons who are selected to participate in recognized games (as players only) in 
National and /or International event of handicapped persons are also eligible for grant of special 
leave and financial assistance.  Such financial assistance is restricted to TWO occasions. 
201. Sportspersons recruited/appointed on sports consideration/quota are normally posted at 
the headquarters of the LHO and/or are transferred to other centres, in case of need, provided 
practice /training facilities are available thereat. Sportspersons recruited / appointed on sports 
consideration/quota are exempted from completion of RUSU assignment which is otherwise 
mandatory for promotion in Officer's cadre upto certain grade provided they continue to be 
active sportspersons and have otherwise not been promoted to SMGS IV or above. Relaxations in 
promotion upto Scale III level (i.e., 5% in written examination and 10% in the interview) are 
available to all categories of sportspersons either recruited on sports quota or otherwise.  
Similarly, except veteran sportspersons, other categories of sportspersons are considered for one 

out-of-turn promotion in the entire career in disciplines recognized by the Bank, subject to found 
suitable in interview and medically fit.  
 
UBI 
202. The representative of Union Bank of India submitted that the Bank has recruited 
outstanding sportspersons based on the norms/procedure prescribed by the Bank's Sports Board 
(BSB) established by the Indian Banks' Association (IBA), which were in turn based on the 
guidelines laid down by the Ministry of Finance, Banking Division's letter F. No.4/3/2/91-IR dated 
16.11.1992 and dated 13.10.1993. Bank's Promotion Policy for Officers provides for one out-of-
turn promotion to an officer employee in the entire service period for winning a medal for the 
country in an individual/team sports event like Olympics, Asiad or any other International event, 
or is awarded a National Award in any sports by the Government of India. On promotion, every 
officer is transferred and posted outside the parent state.  However, the sportspersons who 
regularly take active part in sports events at State/National/International levels are retained in 
the parent state, on promotion. 
 
203. In respect of Clerical and sub-staff employees, the Bank maintains a Request Transfer 
Diary station-wise and the applications for request transfers are entertained in terms of the order 
contained in the diary.  However, employees appointed as sportspersons have preference over 
the transfer diary. Further, the Bank allows 2 hours relaxation everyday to all the active 
sportspersons to attend to regular practice session. Bank also reimburses the travelling expenses 
in connection with sports events held at outstations for all the participating employees as per 
rates and allowances as applicable to Officers in JMGS-I.  In respect of local events, Daily 
allowance is paid to the participants. Bank provides Sports Kits required by the teams on yearly 
basis. To enable the Bank's teams (Football and Hockey) to practice regularly, the Bank pays the 
Ground Rent on annual basis of 60000/- to the Karnataka Sporting Association-Mumbai where 
the football team practices between 7.00 a.m. to 9.00 a.m. daily.  Further, the Bank's Hockey 
team practices at the Bombay Hockey Association (BHA) stadium for which the annual affiliation 
fee of 18000/- is paid by the Bank. 
204. For Staff Welfare measure, Bank has established Sport and Cultural Clubs in all the 
administrative offices in order to assist the employees in bringing out their talents and hold 
competitions in games and activities by involving the staff and their family members. For the FY 

2013-14 an amount of 60.20 lacs and for the FY 2014-15 an amount of 71.84 lacs was approved 
for the purpose.  The Bank also engages talented players on need basis in the age group of 16 to 
21 years who are bonafide students of colleges from year to year for various Sports like Cricket, 
Football, Hockey, Kabaddi, etc on a monthly stipend of 5000/-. They represent the Bank's team 
for various State/National level sports events. Many National/International level players of the 
Bank have brought laurels to the Country, like Shri Pravin Thipsay, Shri Prakash Padukone, Shri 
Satish Rai, Shri Neville Garoga, Shri Raghunandan Gokhle, Shri Kiran Kaushik Ms. Indu Puri, Shri 
Praveen Sundaram, Shri Hemant Heble, Shri Jentry Francis, Shri Sudhakar Kamath, Shri 
Balachandra, etc.  
205. As welfare measure, the Bank has formulated a Scheme known as "Honorarium to Union 
Youth", the objective of which is to nurture the intrinsic talents of the wards of staff members by 
way of providing financial support to them for excellence in sports. The quantum of Honorarium 
per annum is as under:- 
a. 5000/- for obtaining 1st rank in State Level Sports Competitions. 
b. 10000/- for obtaining 1st, 2nd and 3rd rank in National Level Sports Competitions. 
c. 20000/- for obtaining 1st, 2nd and 3rd rank in International Level Sports Competitions. 
 
206. The representative of the Bank also submitted that it has recruited about 200 
sportspersons through sports quota in Clerical and a few in Sub-staff cadre. Bank has also taken 
44 players during 2014-15 and 42 during 2013-14 as Stipendiary players.  The selection is based 
on the criteria such as Age, Educational and Sports Qualifications and discipline as detailed in the 
reply for point no. 7 (B) below, Further, the Committee was informed that the Bank's Board has 
sanctioned 29 vacancies to be filled in the Clerical cadre during FY 2015-16, the process for which 
is going on. The Bank has written to the IBPS for conducting Common Recruitment Process for 
sportspersons as well as taken up the matter with the IBA for formulating a common Sports 
Recruitment Policy for PSBs. The representative of the Bank informed that it has not been a 
contributory to the NSDF in the past.  However, Bank has been making contribution to sports by 
way of providing Sponsorships to various organizations for organizing sports events.  The 
sponsorships during the last 4 years are as depicted below: 
Financial Year Amount (in 
 
2012-13 22,57,300 
2013-14 66,68,787 

2014-15 86,06,000 
2015-16 101,10,353 
Total 2,76,42,440 
    
207. As a Staff Welfare measure, Bank provides subsidy each year for encouraging sports and 
cultural activities to the Regional Offices including those having lead bank responsibilities.  For 
the FY 2013-14, an amount of 8.70 lacs was approved for the purpose for the Regions having 
Lead District responsibilities, of which, an amount of 8.13 lacs was utilized.  For the FY 2014-15 
an amount of 10.10 lacs were approved for the purpose.  Besides, Bank has been providing 
Sponsorships to various organizations across the country for organizing sports events. The Bank 
has regular teams in sports like Cricket, Hockey, Football, Kabaddi, etc. having sportspersons who 
participate in various National as also International events. Bank has been engaging talented 
players on need basis in the age group of 16 to 21 years, who are bonafide students of colleges 
from year to year for various games like Cricket, Football, Hockey, Kabaddi, etc on a monthly 
stipend of 5000/-.  The Bank follows the guideline prescribed by the Banks' Sports Board of the 
IBA.  Further, Bank is taking active interest in the development of Sports by way of recruiting 
sportspersons, providing them various facilities, providing them out-of-turn promotions, 
providing honorarium to wards of employees, providing sponsorships to organizations for 
organizing spots events, etc.  
  
BHARAT HEAVY ELECTRICAL LIMITED (BHEL) 
 
 
208. The representative of Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited (BHEL) submitted that BHEL has 
been sponsoring different sports events such as Cricket, Polo, Golf, Football, Hockey, Kabbaddi, 
Marathon, Archery etc.  In the last 5 years, financial support of nearly 8 crore was provided to a 
range of National and District level events, the prominent being Nagpur Premier League Football 
Tournament, Yonex Sunrise Open Badminton, Women International Cricket Tournament 
between England and India, Nagpur Marathon etc. and towards renovation of sports stadium 
facilities at Silchar, Assam during second half of the past decade. The Company has been 
promoting various sports viz. Hockey, Volleyball, Tennis, Kho-Kho, Polo, Basketball, Chess etc. 
through funding support under the domain of CSR.  Towards this, an amount of nearly 97 lakhs 
has been provided under CSR, including sports infrastructure development (eg. Wooden playing 

surface at Trichy Anna Stadium, and part construction of Kambala Stadium in Udupi District, 
Karnataka) and organizing of sports events by different agencies. 
209. The Company is having around 105 facility centres at different Units in respect of 
Volleyball, Basketball, Table Tennis, Cricket, Badminton, Chess, Carrom, Taekwondo, Wrestling, 
Judo, Baseball, Snooker, Lawn Tennis, Shooting Ball, Swimming, Weightlifting etc. The Company 
contributed by way of sponsorship to over 80 different sporting events during last 5 years across 
the Country, reflecting its commitment to promotion of sports.  The Company also organized 
several sports events in townships/schools sports to inculcate sports spirit in children.  Similarly, 
the Company organizes Inter-Units Sports Meet every year in 16 major sports.  The employees 
are provided sports kits, TA/DA and outstanding sportspersons are provided further 
opportunities to participate in events at the National/State Level. 
210. BHEL has been providing requisite facilitation by way of sponsorships to sports events (at 
National, State and District levels) and has been supporting sports by creation/maintaining of 
infrastructure facilities its different Units besides sponsoring its employees to various sporting 
events. In addition, the Company is one of the active members of All India Public Sector Sports 
Promotion Board (AIPSSPB) since the year 2009. The Committee was informed that BHEL 
incurred an expenditure of over 8 crore during the last 5 years towards such sports promotion 
under the ambit of various initiatives viz. Corporate Social responsibility (CSR), other welfare 
measures, sponsorships and creation/ maintenance of sporting infrastructure. Currently, the 
company is having 46 sportspersons on its rolls, who had represented/ represent BHEL at 
National/ level in their respective sports.   
211. In BHEL, in recruitment to Group 'C' posts, all other criteria being equal, preference for 
sportspersons is provided though there are no specific guidelines for recruitment of 
sportspersons.  In this regard, the guidelines of erstwhile Bureau of Public Enterprises (BPE) 
issued vide BPE OM No. 15/27/84-BPE(GM) dated 05.12.1984 regarding "Appointment of 
Meritorious Sportsmen to Group C and D posts" in CPSEs was cancelled vide DPE OM No. 
20(5)/95-DPE(GM) dated 10.12.1997, and there are no currently applicable DPE guidelines on the 
matter. Need based funds are provided by BHEL for promotion of sports under its "Healthy India" 
focus area of CSR Policy 

212. Shri U. Bharathi, an employee at Bangalore based Unit won Silver Medal in 37th National 
Masters Athletic Championship (2016).  Shri Mohd. Yusuf, an employee at Bhopal Unit, won Silver 
Medal in Bangkok Asian Games (1978).  Shri G. Nelson won Bronze Medal in Masters National 
Power Lifting Championship (2015). In the year 2015, company's employee won Two Gold and 
Three Silver Medals in Athletics events at State level tournaments in Telangana State.  Company's 
major manufacturing units at Bhopal, Hyderabad, Trichy and Haridwar have sports complex to 
cater to the Sporting needs of BHEL employees.  At these places, the Company is having around 
105 sports facility centres in respect of Volleyball, Basketball, Table Tennis, Cricket, Badminton, 
Chess, Carrom, Taekwondo, Wrestling, Judo, Basketball, Snooker, Lawn Tennis, Shooting Ball, 
Swimming, Weight lifting etc. BHEL is having its teams in various sports events organized under 
the patronage of the All India Public Sector Sports Promotion Board, wherein teams have been 
regularly participating. This year in June 2016 BHEL, Bhopal hosted All India Public Sector Shuttle 
Badminton Tournament wherein nine PSUs with National/International reputed players 
participated. 
213. The Company has recently organized All India Public Sector Shuttle Badminton 
Tournament at Bhopal (2016) and another event in Carrom at Delhi (2015).  BHEL has been 
promoting sports in the tribal populace and has contributed towards organising of Chhota 
Nagpur Hockey Tournaments, and Tribal Women Hockey Tournament.   
214. As stated above, BHEL has been providing its sports infrastructure to several organizations 
including sports associations etc. for organizing tournaments /sports events.  On an average 18 
different sporting events are conducted every year at different Units of BHEL.  In BHEL 
Townships, summer coaching camps for budding sports persons/children are also organized. The 
Company has sponsored sports events and developed sports infrastructure in North East and 
Tribal Areas to promote sports in these regions.  The representative of BHEL submitted that as 
the contribution of BHEL towards promotion of sports are felt to be adequate, separate 
contribution to NSDF was not undertaken by it. 
 
SAI UDHAV DAS MEHTA (BHAI JI) CENTRAL CENTRE, BHOPAL  
215. The SAI Central Centre was established at Delhi in April, 1988. Subsequently, the Centre 
was shifted to Gram Gora, Bishen Kheri, Bhopal in 2001 and renamed as Udhav Das Mehta (Bhai 

ji) Central Centre. The Centre is responsible for implementing and monitoring SAI Sports 
Promotional Schemes in the States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh. 
I. Infrastructure/Playing Facilities 
The Centre is spread over 97 acres of land provided by the Govt. of Madhya Pradesh, and has the 
following facilities: 
(a) Outdoor 
Sl. No. Sports Infrastructure Type Nos.  
1. Hockey Fields Grassy 
Astroturf 
Astroturf with flood 
light 
01 
01 
01 
2. Football Ground Grassy 01 
3. Basketball Courts Cemented 03 
4. Volleyball Courts with fencing Clay 03 
5. Athletic Track (400 mtrs) Cinder 01 
6. Jogging track (2.1 km)  01 
7. 9 th Lane Athletic Track and grassy football 
field inside 
Synthetic 01 
8. Boxing Ring Sand 01 
9. Cricket Pavilion  Turf 
Cemented 
03 
01 
 
(b) Indoor 
Sl. No. Sports Infrastructure Type Nos.  
1. 
 
Multipurpose Halls 
 
Small 
Big 
02 
02 
2. Standard Modern Fitness Centre (State of Art 
of Conditioning Hall – cum – Recovery Unit) 
 01 
 
(c) Hostels and other facilities 
Sl. No. Details Nos. 
1. 144 bedded Hostel  01 
2. 52 bedded (men & women) Hostel with air conditioned facilities 02 
3. 48 Bedded Hostel (Hostel No. 4) with AC facilities  01 
4. Changing Rooms  
5. Yoga Centre & fitness Center 01 
6. Administrative Block 01 
7. Sports Science Centre and Medical Centre 01 
8. Staff quarters 32 
9. Convenience Shopping Centre 01 
10. Filtration plant for treatment of raw water 01 

11. Approach road & parking for Athletics Track 01 
12. Billiards Room, Table Tennis Hall, Badminton Court, and 02 Nos. 
of Golf Green (under Community Connect Programme) 
 
 
216. The Committee is disappointed to note that senior-most Officer of the Regional Centre 
was not present before the Committee during its interaction, which deprived the Committee 
from seeking clarifications on the spot.  The Committee, accordingly, advised the Department 
of Sports and SAI that they should take note of this and they should ensure that, in future, the 
senior-most Officer is present in such interactions.   
(G)  UJJAIN 
217. The Committee visited the Achyutananda Guru Akhara in Ujjain.  The Committee found 
that the Akhara was in a dilapidated condition and the wrestlers just existed with very bare 
minimum facilities and non-existent support from any quarters. Though the traditional form of 
Indian wrestling was well preserved in the Akhara, like the wrestlers sand pit, Malkhamb etc., the 
facilities were not up to the mark. The representatives of Akhara submitted that due to fund 
crunch the infrastructure was not maintained.  The representative also submitted that the 
stipend given to the trainees was also very low.   
218.  The Committee after its visit, strongly recommends that SAI should involve any 
PSU/SPB/Corporate to adopt the centre and provide sponsorship to the sportspersons.  The 
wrestling was done in sandpit and SAI should take steps to modernize the Akhara and use new 
equipments and latest facilities, if the Centre is to rise to a higher level. 
(H)  INDORE 
219. The Representative of Narmada Hydro Development Corporation Limited (NHDC) 
submitted that no contribution has been made by it towards NSDF. However for promotion 
Sports, it has sponsored State level Table Tennis Tournaments and Akhil Bhartiya 20-20 
Tournament held at Kandwa twice in the last five years. 
220. In order to promote Sports in NHDC, the organization has been organizing Inter-Project 
Sports Tournament for its employees every year.  The Sports include Cricket, Table Tennis, 
Badminton, Carrom, Chess and Athletics.  The expenses incurred for organizing the event for the 
last three years are as under:- 

2013-14  : 14,64,633/- 
2014-15  : 16,25,397/- 
2015-16  : 17,30,803/- 
221. It was submitted that promotion of Sports is a part of NHDC Corporate Social 
Responsibility and Sustainable Development Policy.  The Corporation has provided Sports 
material to different Schools and assisted in organizing District/State Level Table Tennis and 
Football tournaments.  Further, the Committee was informed that no fixed percentage of CSR 
fund has been earmarked for promotion of Sports.  However, the directives of Central 
Government received through Department of Public Enterprises from time to time as well as the 
policy of NHPC are followed in NHDC. Further, it was submitted that NHDC was formed on 1st 
August, 2000 and it is a lean and thin/small organization consisting of only 467 NHDC cadre 
employees and another 76 employees are on transfer from NHPC and 54 employees are on 
deputation from Government of Madhya Pradesh.  However, the Committee was assured that 
recruitment of sports persons shall be considered as per extant guidelines of the Ministry/DPE 
whenever any recruitment in Group 'C" and "D' post takes place. 
222. The representative submitted that NHPC Limited is the holding company of NHDC. It is a 
member of the Power Sports Control Board, which is responsible for promotion of Sports among 
Power Sector PSUs/organizations, operating under the Aegis of Ministry of Power and 
contributes towards expenditure incurred by this Board.  
223. NHDC Limited provides incentive to its employees, who are Sports persons.  Special 
Casual Leave up to 30 days in a calendar year is given to employees for participation in 
National/International Sports/Games. Cash award amounting 50,000/- is also given to 
employees towards Excellence in Sports at National Level. NHDC has also created infrastructure 
for promotion of Sports among employees at its various Projects. Assistance has also been 
provided to District Table Tennis Association, Khadwa as well as District Football Association, 
Khandwa. 
224. The Committee held discussion with private/corporate organizations on contribution to 
NSDF and sports policies. CIPLA Limited submitted that they had not made any contribution to 
NSDF. They submitted that they were majorly working towards health care and up-liftment of 
health status. They were supporting sports coaches at Institute for the blind at Chandigarh. More 

than 25 visually impaired children are trained in various sports, which helps is them develop their 
personalities. Few of the children had won accolades in various Paralympics events both 
Nationally and Internationally. They submitted that their focus was on health care and funds are 
earmarked in the same head and other heads like education. They also submitted that 65 lacs 
were given under CSR. The representatives of IPCA, Tata International, Bridgestone, Symbiotec 
and Sun Pharma submitted that they were not contributing to NSDF but were contributing to 
CSR.  Tata International added that it will adopt a stadium in Ujjain. The representatives of IPCA, 
Tata International, Bridgestone, Symbiotec and Sun Pharma submitted that they would be 
contributing to NSDF in the future. The representatives of Symbiotec submitted that they had 
appointed permanent sports teacher in 3 villages and 30 lacs was given under CSR.  
225.  The Committee notes that many of the Banks/PSUs have their in-house Sports activities, 
which are well appreciated. However, the purpose of the NSDF is not met by such activities and 
they should work towards ensuring that contributions are made by them for such a noble 
cause, which would propel the youth of the Country towards pinnacle of the sporting world, 
which is lacking at present. The Committee also observes that most of the Banks/PSUs are 
either not aware of the NSDF or contributions thereto has been stopped for some time and 
some a linking NSDF with CSR. Hence, the Committee recommends that Sports Authority of 
India (SAI) should make serious concerted efforts to make all PSUs/Banks including the private 
Banks aware of the fund so that more funds can be mobilized for the promotion and 
development of Sports in the Country.  The Committee also directs all the Banks and the PSUs 
to contribute towards NSDF liberally every year and should also make efforts to adopt one of 
the SAI centres and budding players who may be able to compete/participate in International 
events.  The contribution towards NSDF is not linked with CSR activities.  The contribution to 
NSDF should be made by the banks over and above their CSR activities. 
226. The Committee also notes with happiness the assurance of SAI that more publicity will 
be given to the Corporates/Banks, who contribute to SAI Centres, or sponsor/adopt 
talented/promising young sportspersons. It would be accomplished by Banners in 
Tournaments/logo on Players T-shirts etc. so that their efforts are also given due recognition. 
227. The Committee further notes that many of the Banks are willing to sponsor the talented 
young sportspersons but there is a hiatus in the communication between SAI and the Banks. 

The Committee, therefore, recommends that SAI needs to give specific proposals to the 
concerned Banks and not a general routine communication in this regard, as the importance of 
the objective gets vitiated.  The Committee also recommends the SAI to have a regular 
platform with the representatives PSUs/PSBs as well as Department of P.E. and DFS to give 
effect to this fund so that Indian Sports /Sportspersons do not suffer due to the lack of 
funds/support and by, 2020 Olympics, we will be in a better position to be among the top ten 
Sporting Nations in the world. 
228. The Committee recommends that SAI must give a status note of the recruitment of 
sportspersons in Banks and the contributions made by Banks to the NSDF in the last 10 years, 
so as to have a realistic assessment of the support that is at present available to the 
sportspersons of the Country. 
229. The Committee notes that some of the Banks are not seriously promoting Sports as they 
have no specific Sports policy nor they are recruiting/promoting sportspersons. They are simply 
financing occasional sports events/tournament, or providing some in-house Sports activities, 
which is not the need of the hour. The Committee feels that Banks are the financial nerves of 
the Nation and Indian sports cannot go the extra mile without their assistance. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that Banks/Financial Institutes should make Sports policy an integral 
part of the overall Banking policy and SAI should play a major role in making these a success.   
230. The Committee recommends that SAI should take pro-active steps to improve 
infrastructures/coaching facilities in the rural areas, where there is no dearth of talents. fThe 
Committee, therefore, recommends that SAI should involve Banks in talent hunt at the grass-
root level like at District Level throughout the Country. 
231. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Railways and other PSB/PSUs for 
recruitment of sportspersons in their organizations.  The Committee however, points out the 
PSBs/PSUs have recruited iconic players.  The Committee recommends that there should be a 
definite percentage and horizontal recruitment should be done. 
232. The Committee recommends that there should be uniform guidelines for Recruitment 
and Promotion of Sportspersons in PSBs/PSUs.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
SAI, in-coordination with DoPT, should take up this issue with Department of Financial Services 
and Department of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Corporate Affairs as well as administrative 

Ministries/Departments of the concerned PSUs for issuing guidelines to the respective 
PSBs/PSUs coming under their jurisdiction, in respect with Recruitment and Promotion of 
Sportspersons in their organizations.  
233. The Committee finds that the majority of the appointment has been done in the non-
officer category.  The Committee recommends that player who has played at the National 
level, should be inducted at the Officer Cadre (Group A).  The Committee further recommends 
that sportspersons who played at the State and District level, should be recruited in Group B or 
C. 
234. The Committee recommends that, NSDF has to be supported by Government/ Public 
Enterprises/ PSUs/ PSBs/ Corporates/ Private Bodies as well, and transparency has to 
maintained not only for channeling money to short-term programs such as training and 
competitions, but also for investing in long-term development projects such as building 
stadiums and training facilities and purchasing equipments. Besides, the Committee strongly 
advocates the Council of NSDF, which manages this Fund, should have a big say from members 
drawn from a variety of different backgrounds, inc 
luding, of course, sportspersons, administrators and the business world as well, so that the 
experiences and good practices from all quarters can be gainfully utilized, so that India rise to 
the level of the major Sporting Countries in the world. 
235. The sports-related authorities must rationally utilize the resources, which are already 
not adequate. Archery, Shooting, Wrestling, Boxing, Track & field sports and Badminton are 
good sports areas since there are more medals at stake in these disciplines, and India is proud 
of having a promising pool of talents. The Committee, therefore, endorses the view of the 
Department of Sports/SAI for according top priority to these Sporting disciplines.  
*********** 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
(I) VISIT TO THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, MUMBAI AND UDAIPUR 
 
(B) MUMBAI 
   During interaction with the Committee, it was informed that the Bank is willing to 
support/sponsor talented/promising sportspersons. However, no proposal was received by 
them from SAI. In response, SAI Officials informed that the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports 
has already written to Department of Financial Services. The Committee, therefore, directed 
SAI to give specific proposal to the Bank and not just a general routine communication, which 
would lose its importance.                                 (Para 46) 
(C) UDAIPUR 
 The Committee directs that an updated accounts of the expenditure made from this 
fund should be provided to the Committee along with the performance and achievement of the 
beneficiaries to whom this expenditure was incurred.  The Committee also strongly suggests 
that the Department of Sports should keep a record of the contributions made to the NSDF and 
also pursue with other PSBs/PSUs on keeping a database of their contributions.     (Para 75)                        
 The Committee lauded the effort of IIFCL, Bank of Baroda and Oriental Bank of 
Commerce for their contribution extended for promotion of sports and these Organizations 
will set a very big example for the benefit of the Sports in the Country as a whole. The 
Committee urges the other organizations to start looking into this aspect and go for 
contributing to this noble cause, which will ultimately contribute to making India a strong 
and confident Sporting Nation. The Committee also endorses the idea of sponsoring of 
deserving Sportspersons by Banks and PSUs or the adoption of a Sporting Centre, 
preferably in a rural or backward region of the Country, from where the unpolished raw 
talents would definitely arise.        (Para 104) 
 
  The Committee, however, also noted the negligible contribution to Sports by some of 
the PSUs/PSBs, be it contribution to NSDF, recruitment of Sportspersons or even the existence 
of Sports policy in their organization. Many of the organizations have simply cited their internal 
sports activities or support given to their own employees for some sporting events. 
Recruitment of Sportspersons is negligible compared to the overall strength of their 
employees. The Committee hopes that with organizations such as IIFCL, Bank of Baroda, 
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. etc. coming forward and setting good examples, others would 

follows suit and make this venture a grand success and the goals of the Indian Sports 
achievable in the next few years.        (Para 105) 
 
II.  LOCAL VISIT TO JAWAHAR LAL NEHRU STADIUM 
 The Committee appreciates the effort put in by Indian Railways for promotion of sports 
in India and the initiatives taken by it at various levels starting from Zonal level to National and 
International levels.  The Committee suggests that since Indian Railways has a vast Network 
across the Country, it should consider setting up of Sports Centres in rural areas also, which will 
also improve their out reach as well as increase their pool of Sportspersons. The Committee 
also recommends that SAI should co-ordinate with Indian Railways in setting up these rural 
centres and also provide expertise.         (Para 128) 
 
 The Committee notes that there is still some confusion among the PSUs regarding NSDF 
and CSR.  The Committee observes that CSR comes under the Companies Act, while NSDF 
comes under Society Endowment Act.  Hence, contribution under CSR cannot be equated to 
NSDF.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Sports, in coordination 
with Department of Public Enterprises and Department of Corporate Affairs, should 
immediately undertake with right earnest, to educate the PSUs/PSBs about the functioning of 
NSDF as well as the process of making contributions thereto.    (Para 140) 
 The Committee was informed that a draft sport policy for promotion of sports in the 
Company as well as in the country and weight age for recruitment of sportspersons has been 
prepared and is under consideration.  The representatives submitted that no guidelines from 
the Government/Ministry have been received by it.  NBCC also does not have a Sports 
Promotion Board presently. The Committee is happy to note the representative of NBCC 
committed for making a contribution of 10 lakhs for NSDF and encourage other PSUs to take 
similar steps to improve the status of sports in the country and infrastructure facilities of 
games.           (Para 144) 
 The Committee visited the Athletic Track inside the main stadium of Jawaharlal Nehru 
Sports Complex to assess the available track and field facilities as well as interaction with 
coaches and budding athletes practicing there.  Track and field facilities are usually designed as 
multi-purpose facilities, and generally used for daily training as well as staging National, 
regional or local competitions. The staging of competitions at higher levels, of course, entails 

more extensive requirements for sports facilities, particularly concerning the infrastructure and 
regular maintenance. The Committee was dismayed to find the worn-out status of track and 
field facilities. The upkeep seemed to be disastrous and grass field surround inside this oval 
running track was also in pitiable condition. The track had caved in at several places and was 
dangerous for anybody as it was covered at several places.  It was told that there was a tunnel 
underneath the track and was prone to collapse.  There were several potholes which were 
several feet deep and were death traps for the athletes.      (Para 147) 
 The Committee observes that the prevailing condition demanded fresh replacement 
and laying of eight lane international sized synthetic athletic track so as to tide over the 
disarray of track and field facilities.  The grass field imposed inside the oval track also required 
immediate soil/sand filling accompanied with proper leveling and fresh laying of grass so as to 
give a world class look.  This area is very vital since other sports events like throws and jumping 
events are organized here.                 (Para 148) 
 The Committee observes that the prevailing conditions have led to a sore point for 
players.  It was felt that this football ground needs a thorough upliftment befitting the 
international standard since Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium sports complex is well known multi-
purpose sports arena where several sports events like Asian Games in 1982, Asian 
Championship Athletics in 1989 and Commonwealth Games in 2010 were organized.  
   (Para 149) 
 The Committee further visited the football ground beside the main stadium, where 
selected budding players come for the practice session for football.  The Committee was 
anguished to find that the football ground is in unplayable condition as the maintenance was 
almost at the lowest ebb. It was also told that the field had not been maintained for the last 
one and half years. The CPWD Engineer present at the site told that they have not been given 
money for carrying out maintenance works. This ground was prepared at a cost of 2.50 crores 
and International pitch was laid. Since no maintenance was carried out for so long, it was dusty 
and full of potholes and looked like drought affected agricultural field.   Members were very 
anguished to see the sad state of affairs. The Committee impressed upon the Ministry to setup 
a high level inquiry and fix responsibility for omission and commission and send the report to 
the Committee within one month from the presentation of this report to the House.  The 

Committee also directs that upkeep, maintenance and administration must be handed over to 
responsible persons with professional experience.     (Para 150) 
III. VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE TO CHENNAI, VISHAPATNAM, BHOPAL, UJJAIN 
AND INDORE 
(D) CHENNAI 
 
(E) VISHAKAPATNAM 
 The Committee is disheartened to note that PSUs/PSBs are not taking the issue 
seriously as negligible improvement is seen in the performance of NSDF and other pro-Sports 
initiatives espoused by the Committee. The Committee, therefore, urges to various 
Departments of the Government of India like Department of Defence Production, under whom 
many of the major PSUs of the Country operate, to consider supporting Sports either in the 
form of Contribution to NSDF or adopting some SAI Centre as well as recruitment of 
Sportspersons in such organizations, which would go a long way in sending the right message 
to the Corporate world.         (Para 182)  
 The Committee also recommends that Banks should step out and provide the last mile 
connection to the raw talents in the rural and Tribal areas as they have the local presence 
through their Branches. Thus, Banks can, in co-ordination with SAI, identify such young talents 
and they could be nurtured further as this is where the real Indian Sports reside.    (Para 183) 
(F)  BHOPAL 
 The Committee is disappointed to note that senior-most Officer of the Regional Centre 
was not present himself before the Committee during its interaction which deprived the 
Committee from seeking clarifications on the spot.  The Committee, accordingly, advised the 
Department of Sports and SAI that they should note of this and they should ensure that, in 
future, the senior-most Officer is present in such interactions.           (Para 216) 
(G)  UJJAIN 
  The Committee after its visit strongly recommends that SAI should involve any 
PSU/SPB/Corporate to adopt the centre and provide sponsorship to the sportspersons.  The 
wrestling was done in sandpit and SAI should take steps to modernize the Akhara and use new 
equipments and latest facilities, if the Centre is to rise to a higher level.    (Para 218) 

(H)  INDORE 
The Committee notes that many of the Banks/PSUs have their in-house Sports activities, 
which are well appreciated. However, the purpose of the NSDF is not met by such activities and 
they should work towards ensuring that contributions are made by them for such a noble 
cause, which would propel the youth of the Country towards pinnacle of the sporting world, 
which is lacking at present. The Committee also observes that most of the Banks/PSUs are 
either not aware of the NSDF or contributions thereto has been stopped for some time and 
some a linking NSDF with CSR. Hence, the Committee recommends that Sports Authority of 
India (SAI) should make serious concerted efforts to make all PSUs/Banks including the private 
Banks aware of the fund so that more funds can be mobilized for the promotion and 
development of Sports in the Country.  The Committee also directs all the Banks and the PSUs 
to contribute towards NSDF liberally every year and should also make efforts to adopt one of 
the SAI centres and budding players who may be able to compete/participate in international 
events.  The contribution towards NSDF is not linked with CSR activities.  The contribution to 
NSDF should be made by the banks over and above their CSR activities.   (Para 225) 
 The Committee also notes with happiness the assurance of SAI that more publicity will 
be given to the Corporates/Banks, who contribute to SAI Centres, or sponsor adopt 
talented/promising young sportspersons. It would be accomplished by Banners in 
Tournaments/logo on Players T-shirts etc. so that their efforts are also given due recognition. 
                 (Para 226) 
 The Committee further notes that many of the Banks are willing to sponsor the talented 
young sportspersons but there is a hiatus in the communication between SAI and the Banks. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that SAI needs to give specific proposals to the 
concerned Banks and not a general routine communication in this regard, as the importance of 
the objective gets vitiated.  The Committee also recommends the SAI to have a regular 
platform with the representatives PSUs/PSBs as well as Department of P.E. and DFS to give 
effect to this fund so that Indian Sports /Sportspersons do not suffer due to the lack of 
funds/support and by, 2020 Olympics, we will be in a better position to be among the top ten 
Sporting Nations in the world.        (Para 227) 

 The Committee recommends that SAI must give a status note of the recruitment of 
sportspersons in Banks and the contributions made by Banks to the NSDF in the last 10 years so 
as to have a realistic assessment of the support that is at present available to the sportspersons 
of the Country.         (Para 228) 
 The Committee notes that some of the Banks are not seriously promoting Sports as they 
have no specific Sports policy nor they are recruiting/promoting sportspersons. They are simply 
financing occasional sports events/tournament, or providing some in-house Sports activities, 
which is not the need of the hour. The Committee feels that Banks are the financial nerves of 
the Nation and Indian sports cannot go the extra mile without their assistance. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that Banks/Financial Institutes should make Sports policy an integral 
part of the overall Banking policy and SAI should play a major role in making these a success.   
             (Para 229) 
 The Committee recommends that SAI should take pro-active steps to improve 
infrastructures/coaching facilities in the rural areas, where there is no dearth of talents. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that SAI should involve Banks in talent hunt at the grass-
root level like at District Level throughout the Country.    (Para 230) 
 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Railways and other PSB/PSUs for 
recruitment of sportspersons in their organizations.  The Committee however, points out the 
PSB/PSU have recruited iconic players.  The Committee recommends that there should be a 
definite percentage and horizontal recruitment should be done.          (Para 231) 
 The Committee recommends that there should be uniform guidelines for Recruitment 
and Promotion of Sportspersons in PSBs/PSUs.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
SAI in-coordination with DoPT should take up this issue with Department of Financial Services 
and Department of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Corporate Affairs as well as administrative 
Ministries/Departments of the concerned PSUs for issuing guidelines to the respective 
PSBs/PSUs coming under their jurisdiction in respect with Recruitment and Promotion of 
Sportspersons in their organizations.      (Para 232)  
 The Committee finds that the majority of the appointment has been done in the non-
officer category.  The Committee recommends that player who has played at the National level 
should be inducted at the Officer Cadre (Group A).  The Committee further recommends that 

sportspersons who played at the State and District level should be recruited in Group B or C. 
           (Para 233) 
 The Committee recommends that, NSDF has to be supported by Government/ Public 
Enterprises/ PSUs/ PSBs/ Corporates/ Private Bodies as well, and transparency has to 
maintained not only for channeling money to short-term programs such as training and 
competitions, but also for investing in long-term development projects such as building 
stadiums and training facilities and purchasing equipments. Besides, the Committee strongly 
advocates the Council of NSDF, which manages this Fund, should have a big say from members 
drawn from a variety of different backgrounds, including, of course, sportspersons, 
administrators and the business world as well, so that the experiences and good practices from 
all quarters can be gainfully utilized, so that India rise to the level of the major Sporting 
Countries in the world..                                      (Para 234) 
 The sports related authorities must rationally utilize the resources, which are already 
not adequate. Archery, shooting, wrestling, boxing, track and field and badminton are good 
sports areas since there are more medals at stake in these disciplines, and India is proud of 
having a promising pool of talents. The Committee, therefore, endorses the view of the 
Department of Sports/SAI for according top priority to these Sporting disciplines. 
           (Para 235)   
 
*********** 
 
 