 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022 / Agrahayana, 1944, (Saka)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report No 
346 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the  
Three Hundred Thirty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants 
2022-23 of the Ministry of Women and Child Development  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on …...................., 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on….… ............, 2022) 
THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three 
Hundred Thirty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants 2022-23 
of the Ministry of Women and Child Development  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in  

Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Thirty 
Eighth Report on Demands for Grants 2022-23 of the  
 Ministry of Women and Child Development  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on19th December, 2022) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944(Saka) 
 
 
  


 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ….................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................  (iii) 
3.  ACRONYMS.....................................................................................................        (iv)-(vi) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…................  1-25 
Chapter-I  -   Recommendations which have been accepted by Government.........2-15 
 
Chapter -II  -  Recommendations which the Committee does not desire 
to pursue in view of Government’s replies......................   16-21 
Chapter-III -  Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee......................    22-24 
 Chapter-IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
are still awaited…........................................    25  
   
5. RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE...................    26 
6. MINUTES ..............................................................................................................      27-28 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13thSeptember, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
3. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
4. Ms. Sushmita Dev  
5. *Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
6. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
7. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
8. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
9. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
10. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. **Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Sangam Lal Kadedin Gupta 
16. Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
17. Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
18. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
19. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
20. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
21. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
22.  Shri Balak Nath 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
28. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
29.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
30. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
31. Shri S. Venkatesan 
 
*Nominated w.e.f. 11.10.2022 
**Nominated w.e.f. 16.11.2022 
 (i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Smt. Nirmala Bhatt, Joint Secretary 
Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary 
Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
  

 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Forty Sixth Report of the Committee on the Action 
Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Three Hundred and Thirty Eighth 
Report of the Committee on "Demands for Grants 2022 -23 of the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development" which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16th 
March, 2022. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations contained in above mentioned Report 
were received from the Ministry of Women and Child Development vide their communication dated 
30th August, 2022.  
3.  The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on         
15th December, 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
15th December, 2022                                                                                                                 
Agrahayana 24, 1944 (Saka)
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
Shri Vivek Thakur 
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports 

ACRONYMS 
  
  
ANM  Auxiliary Nurse-Midwife 
ASHA Accredited Social Health Activist 
AWC  Anganwadi Centre 
AWH  Anganwadi Helper 
AWW Anganwadi Worker 
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy  
BBBP  Beti Bachao Beti Padhao 
BE  Budget Estimates 
CARA Central Adoption Resources Authority 
CCI  Child Care Institution 
CPS  Child Protection Services 
CSWB Central Social Welfare Board 
CWC  Child Welfare Committee 
CWPO Child Welfare Police Officer 
DBT  Direct Benefit Transfer 
DCPU District Child Protection Unit 
DELNET Developing Library Network 
DLCW District Level Centre for Women 
DLSA  District Legal Service Authority  
DM  District Magistrate 
DWS  Drinking Water and Sanitation 
EC  Empowered Committee 
ECCE  Early Childhood Care and Education 
EFC  Expenditure Finance Committee 
EWRs  Elected Women Representatives 
FNB  Food and Nutrition Board 
FY  Financial Year 
GFR  General Financial Rules 
IBRD  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
ICDS  Integrated Child Development Services 
IA  Implementing Agency 
(iv) 
 
 

 
IT  Information Technology 
ITPA  Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act 
JJB  Juvenile Justice Board 
MHA  Ministry of Home Affairs 
MLALADS Member of Legislative Assembly Local Area Development Scheme  
MoU  Memorandum of Understanding 
MPLADS Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme 
MPV  Mahila Police Volunteer 
MWCD Ministry of Women and Child Development 
NCLP  National Child Labour Project 
NCPCR National Commission for Protection of Child Rights 
NCW  National Commission for Women 
NeGD National e-Governance Division 
NEP  National Education Policy 
NHFS  National Family Health Survey 
NHRC National Human Rights Commission 
NICSI  National Informatics Centre Services Inc. 
NIMHANS  National Institute of Mental Health & Neurosciences  
NIPCCD National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development  
OSC  One Stop Centre 
PAB  Project Approval Board 
PAP  Prospective Adoptive Parents 
PMMVY Pradhan Mantri MatruVandana Yojana 
POCSO Protection of Children from Sexual Offences 
 
PW&LM Pregnant Women and Lactating Mother 
RE  Revised Estimates 
RMK   Rashtriya Mahila Kosh 
RO  Reverse Osmosis 
RWHS Rain Water Harvesting Structures 
SAG  Scheme for Adolescent Girls 
SAM  Severe Acute Malnutrition  
SARA State Adoption Resources Authority 
SCPCR State Commission for the Protection of Child Rights 
(v) 
 

 
 
SCPS  State Child protection Society 
SJPU  Special Juvenile Police Unit 
SoE  Statement of Expenditure 
SRCW State Resource Centre for Women 
UC  Utilization Certificate 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization  
UNICEF United Nations International Children Emergency’s Fund 
UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 
UT  Union Territory 
VHSNC Village Health Sanitation & Nutrition Committee 
VO  Voluntary Organization 
WHL  Women Helpline 
WLCWPC Ward Level Child Welfare and Protection Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi) 
 

 
 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations /Observations contained in its 338 th Report on 
“Demands for Grants 2022 -23 of the Ministry of Women and Child Development ” 
which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16 th 
March, 2022. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations contained in above 
mentioned Report were r eceived from the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
vide their communication dated 30 th August, 2022. These have been categorized as 
follows.  
Chapter I: Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
Paras – 2.3.5, 2.5.1, 3.1.8, 3.2.6, 3.3.4, 3.4.3, 3.4.5, 3.5.1, 3.5.3,  
  3.5.5, 3.7, 3.8 
Total -  12 
 
Chapter II: Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of Government's replies:- 
Paras –  2.2.1, 2.4.2,  3.6.2, 3.7.1, 3.9.1 
Total -  5 
 
Chapter III: Recom mendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:- 
Paras-  3.1.7, 3.5.2, 3.6.1 
Total -  3 
 
Chapter-IV:  Recommendations  in respect of which replies of the Government 
are still awaited:- 
Paras -  Nil  
Total -  Nil 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY  
 
Recommendation 
The Committee is constrained to observe that the actual expenditure has been 
showing a declining trend  over the years which is not only worrisome but is also 
indicative that there is a need to address the issues which are proving as obstacles. The 
Committee understands that under each of these schemes/programmes, financial and 
physical targets are fixed in  accordance with the Annual Action Plan, preparation of 
which itself is a very exhaustive exercise. However, funds remaining underutilized 
indicate that financial prudence is not being exercised while seeking budget allocation 
under these schemes or there are gaps in proper planning, implementation and 
monitoring which is resulting in steep decline in actual expenditure. The Committee 
also appreciates that for the past two years, the pandemic and the related restriction of 
activities has had a severe effect  on the implementation of the Schemes. However, in 
such a situation, it is the targeted beneficiaries who are denied the benefits of the 
schemes/programmes. The Committee observes that if allocation is not utilized fully, the 
purpose of recommending increa sed allocation gets defeated. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends the Ministry to exercise financial prudence and make 
endeavour to utilize the allocated funds optimally and judiciously. The Ministry may 
devise a framework for cent percent utilization o f funds and fix responsibilities for any 
lapse at any level. Moreover, if there is underutilization of funds in the schemes, the 
Ministry may re-appropriate such funds at revised stage for other schemes where there 
is a shortage of funds after obtaining due approval of the Ministry of Finance. 
(para 2.3.5) 
 
Action Taken   
The Ministry of Women and Child Development has informed that the actual 
expenditure incurred by the Ministry from the year 2016-17 is indicated below: 
 
                                                                                             (₹ in Cr.) 
Year BE Expenditure   
2016-17 17408.12 16597.54 
2017-18 22094.67 20020.47 
2018-19 24700.00 22534.33 
2019-20 29164.90 22679.90 
2020-21 30007.10 18744.13 
2021-22 24435.00 21283.56 

3 
 
 
From the above data , it may be seen that there has been a trend of increasing 
expenditure/releases by this Ministry over the past years ; however this increasing trend 
was dampened due to the COVID -19 pandemic during FYs 2020 -21 and 2021 -22. It 
may also be seen that in FY 2021 -22, there was a sharp rise in release of funds 
compared to the previous FY 2020 -21 despite pandemic conditions. It is pertinent to 
inform that all the MWCD schemes are Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) and are 
thus implemented by the States/Union Territories. The budget allocation for these 
schemes is finalized based on inputs received from the States/UTs regarding the ir 
requirements and the trend of expenditure over the previous years. Further, under CSS , 
States/STs require to contribute their corresponding share of funds and also need to 
incur a minimum of 75% expenditure of total available funds, submit the Statement  of 
Expenditure (SoE)/UCs to enable this Ministry to release the central share of funds. 
Wherever the above conditions are not met, releases of the central share gets 
affected/delayed resulting in unspent balances at the fag end of the FY. Efforts are 
always made to re -appropriate the funds at the RE stage and to deploy them where 
required. 
Keeping in view the recommendations of the Committee, this Ministry would 
make renewed efforts to further strengthen the monitoring mechanism to ensure that 
States/UTs seek their allocations timely. There are several initiatives in the pipeline that 
shall make monitoring more effective. 
 
Recommendation 
The Committee recommends that in view of this * flagship scheme being the 
mainstay with 80% of the total allocation being used through this scheme, a well -
defined monitoring mechanism with inbuilt system for regular monitoring will be 
helpful in fund management and also in plugging the loopholes, if an y, in 
implementation of the Scheme. The budget allocated for Saksham Anganwadi and 
POSHAN 2.0 (Umbrella ICDS - Anganwadi Services, Poshan Abhiyan, Scheme for 
Adolescent Girls) is Rs 20,263 crore, which is a small increase from Rs 20,105 crore in 
2021-22. The Committee hopes that the suggested monitoring mechanism will also help 
the Ministry to remain more aware through continuous evaluation, so that if needed, 
additional funds with valid justification and rationale can be sought at the RE stage.  
(para 2.5.1) 
 
Action Taken  
The Ministry has submitted that vide communication dated 13.01.2021 to all 
States/UTs, they have issued Streamlining Guidelines on Quality Assurance, Roles and 
Responsibilities of Duty Holders, procedure for procurement, integrating A YUSH  
_________________________ 
* Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2. 

4 
 
  
concepts and Data Management and Monitoring through  'Poshan Tracker' for 
transparency, efficiency and accountability in delivery of Supplementary Nutrition. 
Under these guidelines, the District Magistrate has been designated as the Nodal Point 
in the district for monitoring nutritional status and quality standards. The D istrict 
Magistrate will also chair the District Nutrition Committee. Further, the utilization of 
funds is also monitore d through Utilisation Certificates / SoEs submitted by 
States/UTs from time to time.  
Information Technology systems are being leveraged to strengthen and bring 
about transparency in nutrition delivery support systems. The 'Poshan Tracker' 
application was rolled out by the Ministry of Women and Child Development on 1 st 
March 2021 through Nationa l e -Governance Division (NeGD), MyGov, as an 
important governance tool. Technology under Poshan Tracker is being leveraged for 
dynamic identification of stunting, wasting, under -weight prevalence among children; 
and last mile tracking of nutrition service delivery.  
The recommendation of the C ommittee to seek additional funds with valid 
justification and rationale at RE stage for the current financial year has been taken note 
of. 
 
STATUS OF INFRASTRUCTURE UNDER AGANWADI SERVICES DURING 
THE LAST FIVE YEARS   
 
Recommendation 
 
During the depositio n by the Ministry, several queries in respect of the 
dilapidated state of old building housing Anganwadis, wages of Anganwadi workers 
and avoidance of their engagement by State Governments in other activities unrelated 
to their core work, were raised by th e Committee.  The Committee also suggests for 
review of the issues like using Anganwadi workers for various other duties, 
enhancement of their Honorarium, opening of large model Anganwadi Centres in each 
District, engagement of Mahila Mandals, finding avenues for CSR funds for building 
AWCs. The Committee is of the view that each of the issues raised needs in -depth 
examination as they bring to the fore the ground level issues and challenges which this 
flagship Scheme faces. The Committee recommends that  these issues be thoroughly 
examined, and a status report be presented to the Committee in this regard.  
(para 3.1.8) 
 
Action Taken  
A status report in respect of each of the issues raised by the Committee is as 
under:  
(i) Dilapidated state of old buildings housing Anganwadis: 
 

5 
 
 
Status of Infrastructure at AWCs (as on 01.06.2021) 
     (in Lakh) 
AWCs in Pucca Building 12.56 
AWCs with Drinking Water 
Supply 
12.23 
AWCs with Sanitation Facilities 11.02 
Growth Monitoring Devices 11.94 
Smartphones with States/UTs 11.03 
 
For construction of AWCs, States would continue to  tap funds from various 
schemes such as 15 th Financial Cycle funds with  Panchayats, Members of Parliament 
Local Area Development Scheme  (MPLADs), Members  of  Legislative  Assembly  
Local  Area  Development  Scheme (MLALADS), Backward Regions Grant Fund, 
Rural Infrastructure  Development Fund, National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 
etc. States/UTs would also co -locate those Anganwadi Centres which are running on 
rent without sufficient infrastructure, to the nearby Primary Schools.  
As regards improvement of condition of Anga nwadis, it is stated that under 
Saksham Anganwadi, across the country 2 lakh Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) @ 
40,000 AWCs per year would be strengthened, upgraded and rejuvenated for improved 
service delivery, for stimulating the creative, social, emotional, cog nitive and 
intellectual development of children under 6 years of age.  Under this component, 
provision would be made for improved infrastructure including Wi-Fi connectivity, 
LED screens, Reverse Osmosis ( RO) machine and smart audio -visual learning aids 
and child-friendly learning equipment for Early Childhood Care and Education 
de1ivery. It has been approved to install Rain Water Harvesting Structures in 2 lakh 
Saksham Anganwadi buildings.  Saksham Anganwadi will additionally have a Poshan 
Vatika.  
 
(ii) Anganwadi workers for various other duties 
 
This Ministry has issued strict instructions to States/ UTs on several occasions to 
avoid the engagement of AWWs/ AWHs  for other duty except for Anganwadi 
services, Poshan Abhiyaan, Scheme for Adolescent Girls ( SAG) and other women/ 
child related work/ activities. 
  
(iii) Enhancement of their Honorarium 
Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) & Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs), being honorary 
workers, are paid a monthly honoraria as  decided by the Government from time to 
time. The Government has enhanced the honorarium given to Anganwadi Workers 
(AWW) and Anganwadi Helpers (AWH) w.e.f 01.10.2018. In addition to the 
honorarium to AWWs/AWHs, Anganwadi Workers are also eligible for an incentive 

6 
 
of Rs 500/ - for feeding of beneficiary da ta, home visits and weighing and measuring 
on the Portal. Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs) would also be eligible for performance 
linked incentive of Rs.250/ - per month for facilitating proper cleanliness  and 
functioning of Anganwadi Centres. In addition, States/ UTs are also paying additional 
monetary incentives/honorarium to these functionaries from their own resources.  
 
In recognition of the hardwork and dedication during the COVID 19 pandemic, 
States/ UTs have been informed regarding the inclusion of AWWs and AWHs in 
Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Package with Insurance Cover of Rs.50 Lakh as per the 
prescribed norms. 
 
 (iv) Opening of large model Anganwadi Centres in each district:  
 
Under Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0,  2 Lakh Anganwadis @ 40,000 per 
year have  to be upgraded as Saksham Anganwadis for  improved service delivery. 
Details have been provided in response above. For the year 2022 -23, S tates have 
already been requested to select districts for upgradation of Government owned AWCs 
to Saksham Anganwadi Centres.  
 
(v) Finding avenues for CSR funds for building AWCs:  
 
Under Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.O, an Umbrella Mission launched by the 
Ministry, it is proposed that States at their own  discretion may involve Individuals, 
Companies, Business houses and Institution of repute and CSR funds for construction 
of AWCs purely on pro bono basis without any obligation. Similarly , DMs may 
encourage/mobilize resources for this purely on pro bono  basis and without any 
obligation. States/UTs may similarly permit funding of Anganwadi Infrastructure e.g., 
toilets, RWHSs , DWS etc.,  or any aspect of Anganwadi activity such as ECCE 
material, furniture, cooking utensils, kitchen infrastructure, storage facility, etc.  
 
FINANCIAL PROGRESS OF POSHAN ABHIYAN  
 
Recommendation 
The Committee notes that to strengthen nutritional content, delivery, outreach, 
and outcomes, Government had merged the Supplementary Nutrition Programme and 
Poshan Abhiyan to launch Mission POSHAN 2.0. The Scheme aims to provide holistic 
nutrition and improve nutritional outcomes for children, pregnant women and lactating 
mothers. The Committee observes that multiple forms of malnutrition have been 
rampant across all age groups in India for several decades now resulting in 
deficiencies, excesses or imbalances in intake of nutrients. The National Family Health 
Survey, December 2020 mentions that malnutrition increased significantly among 
children in 22 States and Union Territories between 2015 -16 and 2019-20. Also, as per 
a Lancet study in 201 9, 68% deaths of children (under five years) were due to 
malnutrition. With Covid -19 further exacerbating this challenge in the country, with 

7 
 
reduction in income and disruption of essential services making the economically 
disadvantaged population more vul nerable to malnutrition and food insecurities during 
lockdown, it is understood that the progress made must have been affected adversely. 
The Committee is of the view that Mission Poshan 2.0 is a critical step towards 
addressing the challenge of malnutriti on; however, its successes will substantially 
depend on the way it is implemented. In this respect, the Committee recommends that 
special efforts be made by the Ministry to highlight and firm up clarity in roles, 
objectives and targets for all stakeholders  involved as this will help to provide a 
sustained focus to the Scheme. 
(para 3.2.6) 
Action Taken  
The Ministry has informed that as per the final NFHS -5 report, the nutrition 
indicators for children under 5 years have improved as compared with NFHS -4 (2015-
16). Stunting has reduced from 38.4% to 35.5%, Wasting has reduced from 21.0% to 
19.3% and Underweight prevalence has reduced from 35.8% to 32.1%.   
However, to address various policy and systemic gaps, the ICDS and 
Anganwadi Services schemes were re -evaluated by the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development in respect of programme design, implementatio n process, outcome and 
impact and for re -assessing the relevance of the programme in achieving its aims and 
goals.  
The Anganwadi Services, Scheme for Adolescent Girls and Poshan Abhiyaan 
have been re -aligned under ‘Saksham Anganwadi and POSHAN 2.0’  for maximizing 
nutritional outcomes.   A paradigm shift has been undertaken for the first time by the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development for improving nutritional norms and 
standards, quality and testing of Take -Home Ration (not raw ration), promoting 
greater stakeholder participation, re -enforcing practices that nurture health, wellness 
and immunity around traditional community food habits and by improving digital 
infrastructure support for last-mile tracking and monitoring of nutrition delivery  
Detailed Streamlining Guidelines on Quality Assurance, Roles and 
Responsibilities of Duty Holders, procedure for procurement, integrating AYUSH 
concepts and Data Management and Monitoring through 'Poshan Tracker' for 
transparency, efficiency and accountability in del ivery of Supplementary Nutrition 
were issued on 13 th January 2021. The guidelines include the need for quality testing 
and identify the key roles and responsibilities at various levels   including at grass root 
levels etc. Further, the guidelines mandate th at States should launch a drive for 
identification of Severe Acute Malnutrition  (SAM) children for referral to hospitals (if 
required) and AYUSH centres in accordance with the detailed action plan approved by 
the District Nutrition Committee to be finalize d in consultation with the Chief Medical 
Officer.  
Under the said Guidelines, District Magistrate shall be the Nodal Point in the 
district for monitoring nutritional and quality standards. Further, for ease of 
administration, SDM/Tehsildars/BDOs may   be nominated as co -nodal officers 

8 
 
responsible for their respective Tehsil/Sub -Division/Block. Chief Secretary of the 
State/UT shall coordinate the activities of various departments through a State Level 
Steering Committee to ensure  effective convergence between various 
schemes/programs having bearing on nutrition and review the progress made regarding 
nutritional indicators on regular basis.  
Further, to facilitate proper monitoring and evaluation as well as proper 
implementation of  the scheme , an Empowered Committee headed by Secretary, 
MoWCD shall be constituted. The Committee shall, inter alia, supervise the usage of 
the budget, lay down detailed cost -norms and recommend such changes in the 
guidelines of the scheme as deemed fit.  
These roles and responsibilities as per the Guidelines will continue to be an 
integral part of Poshan 2.0. The roles and responsibilities at Central, State and District 
level upto the level of Anganwadi Workers and Helpers are clearly outlined in Mission 
Poshan 2.0 scheme guidelines. Further,  social audit by stakeholders, such as the 
Poshan Panchayats, Mothers’ Groups and VHSNCs are recommended for community 
monitoring and community ownership of the Anganwadi programme.  
 
SCHEME FOR ADOLESCENT GIRLS 
 
Recommendation 
The Committee observes that the Scheme recognizes the importance of the 
allaround development and empowerment of adolescent girls and provides a 
nationwide platform to address their challenges. The Committee is of the view that 
besides scaling the  programme in all districts of the country, mechanism for keeping 
sustained focus on outreach and performance for improved implementation must be 
built. The Committee recommends for putting in place a continuous monitoring and 
corrective action taking revi ew of existing systems, and the challenges noticed in 
implementation. In case of difficulties being noticed, possibilities may be explored for 
alternative efficient mechanisms for implementation of the Scheme which has the 
potential to facilitate a healthy and empowered female adolescent population in India.  
(para 3.3.4) 
 
Action Taken 
 With the introduction of Saksham Anganwadi & Poshan 2.0, the Scheme for 
Adolescent Girls  has been revised and subsumed under Saksham Anganwadi and 
Poshan 2.0. The beneficiaries under the Scheme have been revised to identify 
Adolescent Girls in the age group of 14 to 18 years in all Aspirational Districts and 
the North Eastern States. The revised Scheme aims at providing nutritional support to 
identified adolescent girls in the age group of 14 years to 18 years in the Aspirational 
Districts and North Eastern States for improving their health and nutritional status 
under the nutrition component and p roviding them Iron Folic Acid ( IFA) 

9 
 
supplementation, Health check -up and Referral Service, Nutrition & Health 
Education (NHE), skilling etc. under non-nutrition component of the Scheme. 
For effective monitoring of Saksham Anganwadi & Poshan 2.0, the ‘Posha n 
Tracker’ application has been rolled out through National e -Governance Division 
(NeGD), MyGov. It is a governance tool to strengthen and bring  about transparency 
in nutrition delivery support systems. Technology under Poshan Tracker is being 
leveraged f or (i) dynamic identification of stunting, wasting, under -weight 
prevalence among children; and (ii) last mile tracking of nutrition service delivery.  
        Poshan Tracker management application will provide complete beneficiary 
management for pregnant w omen, lactating mothers, children and adolescent girls. The 
system will enable real -time monitoring and tracking of all AWCs, AWWs and 
beneficiaries on the defined indictors. Beneficiaries will be Aadhar seeded to ensure last 
mile tracking. Poshan Tracker will help in generating data, providing feedback to 
Program Managers and documenting the impact of scheme on nutrition indicators. The 
Ministry/ States/ Districts would be able to make effective timely interventions, based 
on the dat a from tracker, continuous evaluation and the progress of different 
components. 
 
Recommendation 
The Committee observes that as regards BE, RE and Actuals for 2021 -22, out of 
the BE of Rs. 900 crores, which was revised to Rs. 829.65 Crores, the utilized 
allocation stands at Rs. 286.57 which is 34.54 % of the RE. Also BE (2022 -23) is for Rs. 
1472.17 crore. The Committee notes that Mission Vatsalya has a total financial 
implication of Rs 10916 Crore, with a Central Share of Rs 6928 crore and State share 
of Rs 3 988 crore and during last 5 years, total allocation under Child Protection 
Services (CPS) Scheme was Rs 3852 crore which shows an increase of about 63.68% in 
allocation under Mission Vatsalya as compared to CPS scheme. The Committee is of 
the view that sin ce children have been recognized by policy makers as one of the 
supreme national assets, and India is home to 472 million children up to the age of 18 
years which comprise 39 percent of the country’s population, it would be prudent for 
the Ministry to get an independent evaluation done of the manner of use of resources, 
allocations, coordination with State Governments, issues hampering effective 
implementation so that the objectives of Mission Vatsalya can be fully realized with the 
enhanced Budgetary alloc ation. Also, the Committee reiterates its recommendation 
made in its earlier Report that children who are rehabilitated should be able to 
integrate into the mainstream society for which it was recommended that the Ministry 
initiatives be undertaken in coor dination with the Ministry of Education and Ministry of 
Skill Development in formulating skill development and vocational training 
programmes for children rescued from begging, drug abuse, child labour and 
adolescent dropout girls. 
 
(para 3.4.5) 

10 
 
 
Action Taken  
The Ministry has  submitted that for the year 2021 -22, an amount of Rs.900.00 
Crore has been allocated for “Mission Vatsalya” (Child Protection Services and Child 
Welfare Services) Scheme at Budget Estimate (BE) stage and Rs.829.65 Crore at 
Revised Estimate (RE) stage. It is submitted that an amount of Rs.761.17 Crore has 
been released up to 31.03.2022 under the Scheme.  Further, it is submitted that an 
independent third party evaluation of the Scheme was done by NITI Aayog which has 
recommended for the continuation of Scheme with increased allocations for the 
scheme. Accordingly, Cabinet has approved the Mission Vatsalya Scheme subsuming 
Child Protection Services (CPS) Scheme up to FY 2025-26. 
It has been further submitted that t he Ministry has issued Mission Vatsalya 
guidelines, which also provide Inter -Ministerial Convergence with various 
Departments/ Ministries including: 
 
Department/Ministry Convergence 
Department of School 
Education and Literacy, 
Ministry of Education 
Education of Children living in CCIs under 
Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan 
Ministry of Skill 
Development and 
Entrepreneurship 
Vocational training of childen living in Child Care 
Institutes/ non -institutional Care under PM 
Kaushal Vikas Yojana & other schemes 
Ministry of Labour & 
Employment 
Under NCLP Scheme, the child labourers rescued 
from work, are produced before the Child Welfare 
Committee of Ministry of Women and Child 
Development. 
Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment 
Provision of de -addiction intervention available 
under Drug de -addiction scheme, in CCIs funded 
under Mission Vatsalya  including Orphan 
abandoned or surrendered children under 
scholarship scheme 
 
NATIONAL INSITUTE OF PUBLIC COOPERATION AND CHILD 
DEVELOPMENT (NIPCCD) 
 
Recommendation 
The Committee recalls that in its 326th Report, it has recommended that NIPCCD 
should create a platform for sharing their research with different Universities having 
gender/women studies and also use the research findings for the benefit of the general 
public. Also, NIPCCD should re -structure itself to provide consultation or consultancy 
services and make impact assessment study of various schemes, programmes relating to 
women and children. It has been informed that NIPCCD shares its Research Studies 
Reports with the database of Developing Library Network (DELNET). The Committee is 

11 
 
of the view that for the Institute to realize its objectives towards coordination and 
promotion of voluntary action in social development and emerge as an institute of 
global repu te in child rights, child protection and child development, it should make 
efforts towards developing partnerships and linkages with national and international 
agencies and making its training and research activities in tune with the needs of its 
varying s takeholders, besides building up an interface with various Universities/ 
Departments/other Institutes working in the same area by sharing of data and 
development of collaborations so that the policy recommendations that come out of the 
evaluation and resea rch studies by the Institute get more synergy and are in tune with 
the ground realities and practical challenges. 
 
(para 3.5.1) 
Action Taken  
The Ministry has informed that NIPCCD is in the process of being restructured 
under the able guidance of Hon'ble Minister of Women and Child Development and in 
coordination with Capacity Building Commission (CBC). CBC has submitted its 
Organisational Strategy Note to HMWCD regarding restructuring of NIPCCD to meet 
the strategic priorities of Ministry of Women and Chil d Development.  In 
Organizational strategy note by CBC, there is mention of formation of various 
Advisory and Monitoring Structures, Organizational Committees including Academic 
Committee and Research Advisory Committee.  In the newly proposed ecosystem, t he 
Core Delivery Team Units   and their compositions as suggested by CBC include the 
following:  
 Research and Policy Unit  
 Capacity Building Unit & Content Development Unit  
 Dissemination and Policy Engagement Unit 
 Technology & Data  Integration Unit 
 Operations Unit Programme  Office 
 Product and Services & Quality Control  
A list of Collaborating organizations on varied issues of women and child 
development have been identified across the country for collaborations in Training, 
Research and sharing best practices across the country.  
 


12 
 
 
The Institute, as a Nodal Agency, has been organizing training 
programmes/workshops/consultations for building a knowledge base as well as 
enhancing capacities of functionaries working under the J uvenile Justice System & 
CPS on child protection at national and regional levels, conducting research studies & 
documentations on the issues pertaining to child rights & protection. The Institute in 
collaboration with following National and International Organisations ha s been 
imparting training to various stakeholders such as functionaries of SCPS, SARA, 
DCPU, CWCs, JJBs, CCIs, SJPU/CWPOs, SCPCR Staff, DLSA Officials/ Para Legal 
Volunteers, NGOs, PRIs, Educators/Teachers of Schools, Colleges & Universities and 
Media Personnel, Universities, Police Academy, Judicial Academy, State Government, 
NGOs, CARA, NCPCR, NHRC, UNICEF and NIMHANS. 
The training is conducted mainly on Child Rights, Child Protection (Child 
Protection Services Scheme), Laws concerning protection of children: JJ Act, POCSO 
Act, the Child Labour Prohibition Act, ITPA, CPCR Act, Policies : National Policy for 
Children, National Plan of Action, National Policy on Child Protection, Violence 
against Children, Child Abuse including child sexual abuse, Cyber  Crimes/ Cyber 
Safety, Child Labour, Child trafficking, Adoption, Child marriage, Other issues: 
mental health interventions & psycho -social care etc. In addition , the institute takes up 
assessment exercises for various schemes of the Ministry, as and when directed. 
 
Recommendation 
The Committee while appreciating the training programmes recommends that the 
Institute should also think in terms of providing some kind of internships to research 
students pursuing related research projects in Universities/Bodies  in the field of women 
and child and gender issues. 
(para 3.5.3) 
 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that t he Institute has the facilities for 
students, namely Internship (Paid and Unpaid) and Field/ Block placements.  NIPCCD 
has been providing Internsh ip to research students on all the key thematic areas 
including women and child through its Internship programmes as well as Field 
Placement at Headquarters and its Regional Centres and in the past five years have 
collaborated with 40 Institutes across the country. 
 
Recommendation 
The Committee observes that there has been decline in the utilization of allocated 
funds by the NIPCCD over the last few years. The Ministry has informed that most of 
the training programmes were conducted online thereby reducing the expenditure 
substantially. The Committee is of the view that as the pandemic wanes, a planned and 
defined chart of activities of the Institute, both in the nature of academic research and 

13 
 
training outreach, may be worked out, which will prove beneficial in realization of its 
mandate and better utilization of allocated funds. 
(para 3.5.5) 
Action Taken  
The Ministry has informed that with regards to decline in the utilization of 
allocated funds by the NlPCCD over the last few years as most of the training 
programmes were conducted  online thereby reducing the expenditure substantially, it 
is to submit that a defined chart of activities of the Institute, both in the nature of 
academic research and training outreach has been worked out in the Work plan 2022 -
23 so as to have a mixed ap proach of both physical as well as online (Phygital 
approach) which will prove beneficial in realization of its mandate and better 
utilization of allocated funds. 
 
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR PROTECTION OF CHILD RIGHTS 
(NCPCR) 
 
Recommendation 
The Committee is of the view that there is a need for proactive advocacy and 
action on part of the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) to 
highlight child right issues. Upon being informed during the deposition by the Ministry 
about illegal adoption r ackets and the NCPCR working in that field, the Committee 
feels that since issues of child trafficking and abuse need close coordination with law 
enforcement authorities, the NCPCR should evolve a system to keep itself abreast of any 
such illegal adoptions, which can be taken up with the concerned stakeholders . 
 
(para 3.7) 
 
Action Taken  
The Ministry in its reply has submitted that it is stated that in India, the process 
of adoption can be done in two ways. One, as per the procedure laid down under the 
provisions of Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 and the 
other, under the provisions of Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956. Under 
Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956 (HAMA) it is observed that the procedure 
laid down is  not specific as to the terms of documenting such adoptions on record 
which is why the adoptions conducted under this Act remain unregulated and 
unaccounted for, further leaving scope of illegal adoptions of minors.  
As no procedure has been laid down for a doptions under HAMA, adoptions 
made under the Act remains unregulated due to which monitoring of adoptions 
becomes impossible which further gives rise to the possibility of giving children up for 
adoption illegally or makes them vulnerable to child traffic king or being traded and 
sold  in exchange of money. As per data of the Commission, since April 2021 till 
March 2022, the NCPCR has received a total of 30 complaints alleging illegal 

14 
 
adoptions. The Commission had taken cognizance of these complaints under Section 
13(1) (j) of CPCR Act, 2005 and asked the concerned authorities to take necessary 
action in the matter. 
Keeping in view the number of complaints received regarding illegal adoptions, 
the Commission devised a portal Baal Swaraj- Covid Care –where the Commission 
is receiving information regarding children who have lost both or single parent to 
COVID or otherwise from the States/UTs on the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court in SMWP (C) No.4/2020 In Re Care and Protection of Children due to loss of  
Parents during C ovid-19. This data is being regularly monitored by the Commission 
for ensuring suitable rehabilitation of children which also includes children who have 
become orphans since April 2020. The directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in this 
matter has ensured for identification and rehabilitation of children who had lost their 
parent(s), which in turn has contributed to an accountability of children thereby 
eliminating the chances of giving such children under illegal adoption. Another fact to  
be noted is that there has been a significant increase in institutional delivery of babies 
than before which is important to take into account while addressing issues of illegal 
adoption and sale of babies.  
Due to these prevailing issues related to the i mplementation of procedures 
prescribed under law and no dedicated monitoring agency to look into the validation of 
Adoption deeds made under the HAMA, the Commission proposes to hold Pan India 
Awareness Program for doctors, nurses, medical superintendents,  Chief Medical 
Officers ( CMOs) and medical regulatory bodies. This will ensure in creating 
awareness regarding the process and procedure to be followed for an orphan, 
abandoned or surrendered child and the issues related to such children. The 
Commission is of the view that proper trainings and consultations should be held with 
doctors, medical practitioners, nurses and other medical staff etc. to apprise them 
regarding due procedure laid down under law.  
The Commission is proposing to hold 05 zonal virtual meetings with doctors, 
medical superintendents, CMOs and medical regulatory bodies to sensitize them about 
the significant role played by them in curbing the problem of illegal adoption. Similar 
meetings for nurses will also be planned separately. There wi ll also be a reporting 
mechanism, in terms of calling for bi-annual reports from the concerned stakeholders.  
 
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WOMEN (NCW)  
 
Recommendation 
The Committee suggests that the Commission may also consider undertaking an 
organized study on Women Police stations as that will bring insights into the issues that 
women are facing with regard to their complaints not being registered and not getting 
justice. The Committee is of the view that there is a need for increased outreach for 
awareness, especially among the uneducated women in the rural areas that such a 
Commission exists to address the issues concerning their rights. The Committee, 

15 
 
therefore, recommends that the Commission may also look into the aspect of building a 
network to reach out and help women who are vulnerable and prone to exploitation.  
(para 3.8) 
 
Action Taken  
Women Police Station (working efficiency and effectiveness) is one of the 
proposed themes of research studies/Seminar to be sponsored for 2022 -23 by NCW. 
NCW has organized legal awareness camp in association with National Legal Services 
Authority and two such camps were organised per district throughout India.  In 2022 -
23, NCW has  planned to take awareness programs up to Taluka and Village level and 
the same will be funded by NCW. A Legal Aid Clinic has been inaugurated at NCW 
office, New Delhi on 29 .03.2022 where vulnerable victims may directly come for 
consultation provided by De lhi Legal Services Authority from 10 AM to 5 PM on all 
working days. NCW has also provided funds to all State Women Commissions to 
establish Legal Aid Clinics in their respective States. Legal Cell at NCW conducts law 
review consultations at North, South, East, West and North East Zones of the country 
so that suggestions can be made on the point where there is lacuna in the law  and for 
the speedy delivery  of justice up to the last mile. NCW is having office only in Delhi 
and it does not have any field off ice. As such, NCW is building network to reach out 
and help women at Pan India level through State Commissions for Women and the 
Departments of Women and Child Development in States.   
  

16 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
  
 
ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY  
 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee notes that the allocation of funds for the welfare of women and 
children in the country comes from various Ministries and as such the allocations in 
this respect are segregated. The Committee is of the view that since women and children 
together constitute about 67.7% of the country's population, as per 2011 Census, 
undertaking an evaluative exercise to collate the Budgetary allocations throughout the 
respective Ministries/ Departments on specific Schemes concentrating on welfare and 
improvement towards condition of women and children in the country, would not only 
be instructive but also be beneficial for policy makers while taking decisions in respect 
of allocations and also helpful in identifying overlapping areas, if any, so as to coalesce 
and synergize the thrust of budgetary allocations. The Committee also observes that 
based on such an evaluation, the Ministry of Women and Child Development being 
mandated with the responsibility of creating an enabling environment for both women 
and children so that they have access to fundamental services such as pre -school non 
formal education, health, nutrition and protection etc. would be able to articulate and 
get greater share of GOI budget so that schemes and programmes being run by them do 
not suffer any lags due to shortfall in resources. 
(para 2.2.1) 
 
Action Taken  
 
The Ministry has informed that for physical, social and economic development 
of women and children, they have introduced key verticals in mission mode namely, 
Mission Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0. Mission Shakti and Mission Vastalya 
and launch of these  Missions is about empowering India. It has been further informed 
that the Department of Expenditure, vide its O.M. dated 01.02.2022 has conveyed that 
the Cabinet vide decision dated 19.01.2022 has approved schemes of the Ministry of 
Women and Child Develo pment (MWCD) for its continuation over the 15 th Finance 
Commission Cycle. These Missions are being enabled through integration of 
programmes and efforts of key Ministries, i.e. WCD, Health & Family Welfare, 
Education, Agriculture, Forestry, Food & Public D istribution and Ayurveda, Yoga and 

17 
 
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH). The Ministry of Women and 
Child Development is striving to achieve the goals mandated to it.  
 
STATMENT INDICATING PROJECTED DEMAND AND ACTUAL 
ALLOCATION FOR THE FIANNCIAL YEAR 2022-23 
 
Recommendation 
The Committee observes from the details given above, it is evident that the BE 
allocation to the Ministry for the year 2022 -23 has registered a meagre increase of 
around 3 percent only over the BE allocation of 2021 -22. In respect of the overall 
projected demand and actual allocations, the Committee is happy to note that unlike the 
previous year, the Projected Demand and Actual Allocation has no gaps for  the F.Y. 
2022-23. The Committee observes that since the allocations to the Ministry have been 
made as per the Projected Demand, the onus of effective implementation of the Schemes 
of the Ministry lies with them as the projected demand of the Ministry for each of its 
programmes and the actual allocations has been bridged completely. The Committee 
understands that when the Ministry raises a demand, they have an assessment of targets 
and outreach of beneficiaries and any gap means that either targets get comp romised or 
intended beneficiaries get left out; both defeating the purpose of the schemes meant for 
the benefit of the most vulnerable section of the society i.e. women and children. In this 
background, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must now p ut in all efforts to 
meet the targets as envisaged under each of the Schemes to make visible improvements 
on the ground. 
(para 2.4.2) 
 
Action Taken  
Ministry of Women and Child Development has informed that it is making 
concerted efforts to ensure that the  allocated funds for 2022 -23 are released timely and 
fully to meet the targets as envisaged under each of the Schemes to make visible 
improvements on the ground. 
 
MISSION VATSALYA (CHILD PROTECTION SERVICES SCHEME)  
 
Recommendation 
The Committee observes that the outcome of such a Scheme i.e., Mission Vatsalya 
(Child Protection Services Scheme) is best measured not against numerical data but in 
the manner in which their effectiveness gets translated into the child protection/ welfare  
set-up in the country. The Committee also feels that it is also the responsibility of the 
States/UTs to effectively implement these schemes at the ground level. The Committee is 
of the view that although substantial progress has been made to provide a ske letal 
framework for rehabilitation of children in difficult circumstances, considerable ground 
is yet to be covered to achieve the outcome fully. The Committee also notes that there is 

18 
 
provision for situational analysis under the scheme, however no such an alysis is 
reported to have been conducted in most of the States. Besides this, delay in submission 
of proposals by States/UTs, absence of certificate of inspection by senior Officers, lack 
of reconciliation of expenditure vis -á-vis funds released are some of the difficulties 
which have been mentioned by the Ministry. As conveyed by the Ministry, the measures 
that have been taken to address the identified issues are steps to streamline the process 
of release of grant to States/UTs so that the implementation of the Scheme does not 
suffer due to delay in fund release, directing States/UTs to conduct situational analysis, 
submission of timely Financial Proposal, provide status of Child Care 
Institutions(CCIs) /Juvenile Justice Boards(JJBs) and status of registra tion of CCIs 
under the Juvenile Justice (JJ) Act, 2015. It has also been noted that the Ministry has 
been frequently conducting National Consultations with all the States/UTs to discuss 
issues related to Child Protection which are also attended by Senior P olice Officers of 
all the States/UTs. The Committee is of the view that addressing the issue of child 
protection requires coordination amongst various Ministries, especially with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, as well as the State Governments. In view of th is, the 
Committee recommends that a coordinating mechanism can be put in place by the 
Ministry with active engagement of the Ministry of Home Affairs in order to make the 
Child Protection Services effective and bring the desired benefits of the Scheme to t he 
children. 
(para 3.4.3) 
 
 
Action Taken  
The Ministry has submitted that the recommendations have been noted. It has 
also  submitted that the Cabinet has approved the Mission Vatsalya Scheme subsuming 
Child Protection Services (CPS) Scheme up to FY 2025 -26. The Ministry has issued 
Mission Vatsalya guidelines, which also provide as follows:  
i. More Emphasis on Non- Institutional Care 
ii. To extend outreach to ground level , a detailed service delivery structure has been 
introduced which includes State Level Monitoring Committee, State Child Welfare 
and Protection Committee, District Child Welfare and Protection Committee, 
Block/Ward Level Child Welfare & Protection Committee , Gram Panchayat Level 
Child Welfare and Protection Committee, and Urban Local Bodies, Ward level 
Child Welfare and Protection Committees (WLCWPC) , Inter-Ministerial 
Convergence with various Departments/ Ministries, viz., Department of School 
Education and Literacy, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship, Ministry of Labour & Employment, Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment and Ministry of Home Affairs has been provided under Mission 
Vatsalya Guidelines for preventio n and protection of children from violence and 

19 
 
abuse; collaboration for restoration of children across States; and information 
convergence for tracking missing children. 
CHILD ADOPTION RESOURCE AUTHORITY (CARA)  
 
Recommendation 
The Committee observes that there is a need to address the issues related to 
filling up vacant posts and conducting training programmes on adoption, media 
activities, inspection, monitoring, etc. by CARA so that surrendering of funds can be 
avoided and hopes that the current year allocation will find better utilization. 
 
(para 3.6.2) 
Action Taken  
The Ministry has informed that the CARA is in the process of filling its vacant 
posts. CARA has prepared its inspection schedule to visit different adoption agencies 
in the country for monit oring their activities during the current financial year.  Also 
CARA would organise more training and orientation programmes as well as conduct 
visits to adoption agencies as soon as the revised Adoption Regulations are notified.  
 
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR PR OTECTION OF CHILD RIGHTS 
(NCPCR) 
 
Recommendation 
The Committee observes that BE (2022 -23) allocated to NCPCR is Rs. 21.09 
crore, which is a substantial increase from the previous allocations. The Committee 
hopes that the NCPCR would have already factored in and planned for the various 
activities which it will be undertaking so that the utilization and outcome levels justify 
the enhanced allocation. 
(para 3.7.1) 
 
Action Taken  
BE allocated to NCPCR during the year 2018 -19 to 2021 -22 was Rs.18.00 crore 
annually, which has been increased to Rs.21.09 crore in the current Financial Year 
2022-23. Increase in current year B.E is of Rs. 3.09 crore due to committed 
liabilities/expenditure such as 10% annual increase in payment of rent of 2 nd& 5th floor 
of Chanderlok Building to NDMC. An amount of Rs. 2.82 crore towards rent has been 
increased since 2018-19 till the current financial year 2022 -23. Further, Rs. 0.27 crore is 
meant for payment to NICSI Cloud services and other programme activities/works.  
 
 
 
 

20 
 
 
NIRBHAYA FUND  
 
Recommendation 
The Committee recalls that in its various recommendations, it has highlighted the 
need for effective utilization of Nirbhaya Fund. Despite the legal frameworks and 
various institutions put in place, violence against women has not been reduced and 
outbreak of COVID -19 pandemic had worsened the situation of women in the country. 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its 334th Report wherein it has 
observed that “underutilization of Nirbhaya Fund has remained a press ing issue of 
concern for long. At present out of the allocated funds of Rs. 9549 crores and funds 
released as Rs. 4241 crores, the funds utilized so far stand at around Rs. 2989 crores 
only. The Committee recommends that the factors which are leading to su ch 
underutilization of the Fund need to be identified. Also, State Governments need to be 
brought onboard in ensuring that the Projects/Schemes, in which they are stakeholders, 
get implemented effectively and any issues raised by the State Governments shou ld be 
addressed expeditiously. The Committee also recommends that the concerned Ministries 
must develop a robust mechanism for constant monitoring of Projects/Schemes being 
handled by them. Also, guidelines may be prepared to ensure that this fund is not 
utilized for creating routine infrastructure, which even otherwise the relevant 
Departments have to undertake. The Committee also stresses that wherever there is 
provision under the guidelines for financial assistance/compensation to the victims, it 
should be ensured that the same is made available without any procedural impediments 
and undue delays". 
(para 3.9.1) 
 
Action Taken  
The Ministry has informed that the total appraised amount under Nirbhaya Fund 
currently stands at Rs.9176.65 crore for 35 different  projects/ scheme s across the 
country. So far, an amount of Rs.4366.90 crore has been disbursed/ released by 
concerned Ministries/ Departments including MWCD for the various projects/ 
schemes under Nirbhaya Fund.  
The projects/ schemes under Nirbhaya Fund are demand driven. The projects/ 
schemes appraised by Empowered Committee (EC) under Framework for Nirbhaya 
Fund are having staggered implementation schedule. Further, some of the appraised 
projects are directly implemented by Central Ministries/ Departmen ts. However, 
majority of the projects are implemented through State Governments/ Union Territory 
Administrations in which Central Government releases the funds to States/ UTs as per 
prescribed fund -sharing pattern of respective projects/ schemes. Thereafte r, 
implementation on ground is done by the States/ UTs in the given timelines. Further, 
there are schemes, which require recurring expenditure for providing services, in 
respect of which, further funds are released upon receipt of Utilisation Certificates 

21 
 
(UCs) and Statement of Expenditure (SoE) from the Implementing Agency/ authority. 
The UCs are required to be submitted within twelve months of the closure of financial 
year, in which grant was released. Hence, it is possible that more funds have been 
actually utilised, but Utilisation Certificates (UCs) and Statement of Expenditure 
(SoE), as required, as per provisions of General Financial Rules (GFR) have not been 
submitted by the concerned States/ Implementing Agencies (IAs). The States/ IAs are 
regularly followed up to submit UCs and SoEs. Various other   factors such as time 
taken in getting required approvals from competent authorities, procedure to be 
followed for award of contract, disruptions due to unforeseen reasons such as the one 
created by the Covid 19 etc., also affect implementation of schemes/ projects.  
An  Empowered Committee (EC) of Officers constituted under the Framework 
for Nirbhaya Fund appraises and recommends the proposals for funding under 
Nirbhaya Fund and also reviews the status of i mplementation as also status of 
expenditure, of approved projects from time to time, in conjunction with the concerned 
Ministries/ Departments/ Implementing Agencies. Further, the concerned Ministries / 
Departments /IAs also monitor the progress of impleme ntation at their levels. 
In so far as creating routine infrastructure is concerned, it is informed that going 
by the provision of Nirbhaya Framework that ‘Optimum use of existing infrastructure’, 
the EC does not consider and appraise the proposal for creat ing any routine 
infrastructure. 
Ministry of Home Affairs has released an amount of Rs.200.00 Crore as a one -
time grant to States/ UTs under Central Victim Compensation Fund (CVCF) under 
Nirbhaya Fund to support and supplement the Victim Compensation scheme s of 
respective States/ UTs. 
 
 
 
 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
STATUS OF INFRASTRUCTURE UNDER AGANWADI SERVICES SCHEME 
DURING THE LAST FIVE YEARS  
 
Recommendation 
The Committee observes that while infrastructure development and capacity 
building of the Anganwadi remains the key to improving the programme, the standards 
of all its services need to be upscaled. The economic fallout of the Covid pandemic has 
made necessity  of quality public welfare services more pressing than ever. Thus, 
Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) could become agents of improved delivery of such services 
and need to play a much larger role in anchoring community development, more so as 
beneficiaries for want of services due to lack of adequate facilities at AWCs, turn to 
paid options, which hit the low -income families the hardest. Also, effective 
implementation of the Scheme rests heavily on the combined efforts of the Anganwadi 
workers (AWWs), ASHAs and ANMs, but a lot requires to be done to improve the career 
prospects and service conditions of these frontline workers. The Committee 
recommends that sustained efforts towards infrastructure development and capacity 
building of the AWCs be made besides upscaling  the standards of all its services. 
Observing that the States have much to learn from each other’s experience and good 
practices, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must undertake a 
comprehensive impact assessment through state -wise review of the s tatus of AWCs and 
its services, to collate the best practices that emerge and push for their adoption in 
States which are lagging. 
 
(para 3.1.7) 
 
Action Taken  
The Ministry has informed that it engages with the States/ UTs regularly to 
understand the problems being faced in the implementation of the Scheme. Recently, 
the Ministry has concluded Zonal Meetings in various parts of the country. The States/ 
UTs shared  their perspectives and best practices being adopted suitable to their 
working conditions.  
The overall objective of the zonal conferences with States/UTs was to sensitise 
States/UTs on the policy decisions and strategies devised by MoWCD under the 
Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 Umbrella Mission and other Missions, to address 
challenges facing women and children and for seeking States' support in implementing 
the Missions through active partnership for positive outcomes.  
 

23 
 
Further, from time to time the Ministry issues Advisories to States/ UTs on 
various policy related matters with an aim to achieve optimum efficiency in 
implementation of the Scheme. Advisories relate to promotion of cleanliness, timely 
disposal of grievances for better citizen centric engagement, policy related issues, etc. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
The Committee notes the engagements being made with States in respect of 
AWCs and is of the view that a blueprint, prepared in consultation with States, 
towards infrastructure development and capacity building of AWCs will prove to 
be of immense help in identification and augmentation of various services and 
reach of AWCs. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take note of 
this and initiate appropriate action towards it.    
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC COOPERATION AND CHILD 
DEVELOPMENT (NIPCCD) 
 
Recommendation 
The Committee also feels that time has come to consider auditing organizations 
on the parameter of gender, more so with the efforts towards social mainstreaming of 
the third gender. The Committee recommends that the assessment process through 
Gender Audit in which the gender equality status of the organization gets analyzed and 
the main gender biases are identified, be made mandatory for Organizations -public or 
private. The Committee feels that efforts in this regard would bring to the fore the status 
of gender equality in policy and decision -making structures, organizational culture and 
processes leading to organizations formulating and implementing Gender Equality 
Plans. The Committee recommends that NIPCCD can examine and take the lead in 
defining the parameters for such a Gender Audit, keeping in view our societal 
challenges. 
 
(para 3.5.2) 
 
Action Taken  
The Ministry has stated that the recommendations have been noted.  
 
Comments of the Committee  
The Committee taking note of  its recommendations in respect of NIPCCD 
for examination and defining the parameters for Gender Audit by the Ministry , 
desires to be kept abreast of the follow up action and a status of progress made in 
this regard. 
 
 
 

24 
 
CENTRAL ADOPTION RESOURCE AUTHORITY (CARA) 
 
Recommendation 
 
The Committee recommends that the process of adoption needs to be simplified 
by taking a close relook at the various regulations guiding the procedure of adoption 
and the Ministry can engage with concerned experts working in this field to get 
feedback on the practical difficulties which prospective parents are facing. The 
Committee also recommends that the issue of children with special needs requires 
special focus in terms  of highlighting and advocacy at various platforms, besides 
regular sensitizing of prospective parents for adoption of such children. It is also 
suggested that CARA can arrange special counseling / sensitization sessions in 
coordination with various fertil ity clinics/ Hospitals/ Maternity centres to encourage 
parents to have a positive approach to adopt children with special needs.  
 
(para 3.6.1) 
 
Action Taken  
The Ministry has informed that the Adoption Regulations 2017 is under revision 
based on the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Amendment Act, 2021 
and feedback received from stakeholders, States/UTs, the Prospective Adoptive 
Parents (PAPs) and experts. CARA has been coordinating with stakeholders for 
expeditious placement of child ren having special needs.  CARA would take up the 
matter of counselling/sensitization in coordination with various Fertility 
Centres/Hospitals and Maternity Centres through various State Orientation 
Programmes.   
 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee while taking note of the submissions made by the Ministry is 
of the view that speeding up the process of adoption of children is the need of the 
hour and the existing process has slowed down the rate of adoption and both 
prospective parents and child ready fo r adoption are losing hope as the wait ing 
time increases.  Thus, while revising the extant regulations, the Ministry/CARA 
should pay attention towards making the entire procedure hassle free and also 
sensitizing prospective parents of the manner in which ch ildren with special needs 
are to be adopted, besides taking into consideration the practical problems faced 
in adoption.  Further, the Committee would like the Ministry  to keep it apprised of 
the progress made in this respect. 
 
  
 

25 
 
 
CHAPETR-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-Nil- 
  

26 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE 
 
The Committee notes the engagements being made with States in respect of 
AWCs and is of the view that a blueprint, prepared in consultation with States, 
towards infrastructure development and capacity building of AWCs will prove to 
be of immense help in identification a nd augmentation of various services and 
reach of AWCs. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take note of 
this and initiate appropriate action towards it.    
 
 (para 3.1.7) 
 
The Committee taking note of  its recommendations in respect of NIPCCD 
for examination and defining the parameters for Gender Audit by the Ministry , 
desires to be kept abreast of the follow up action and a status of progress made in 
this regard. 
 
(para 3.5.2) 
 
 
The Committee while taking note of the submissions made by the Ministry is 
of the view that speeding up the process of adoption of children is the need of the 
hour and the existing process has slowed down the rate of adoption and both 
prospective parents and child ready for adop tion are losing hope as the wait ing 
time increases.  Thus, while revising the extant regulations, the Ministry/CARA 
should pay attention towards making the entire procedure hassle free and also 
sensitizing prospective parents of the manner in which children  with special needs 
are to be adopted, besides taking into consideration the practical problems faced 
in adoption.  Further, the Committee would like the Ministry  to keep it apprised of 
the progress made in this respect. 
 (para 3.6.1) 
 
 
  

27 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
(EWCY&S)  
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports (EWCY&S) met at 10:30 A.M. 
on Thursday, 15th December, 2022 in Committee Room No.4, A-Block, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
3. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
4. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
5. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
7.  Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
8.  Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
9.  Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
10. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
11. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
12. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
13. Shri Balak Nath 
14. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
15. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
16. Shri Dharambir Singh 
17. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
18. Shri S. Venkatesan 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Nirmala Bhatt, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
6. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
7. Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 

28 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He 
then informed that the agenda for the meeting was to deliberate upon and adoption of the following 
six draft Action Taken Reports of the Committee: 
a) * * * 
b) * * * 
c) * * * 
d) * * * 
e) 346th  Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Thirty Eighth Report 
on Demands for Grants 2022-23 of the Ministry of Women and Child Development; 
and 
f) * * * 
3.  The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid six draft Action Taken Reports one by 
one and after a brief discussion, adopted the same with minor changes in * and 346th  Reports. 
4. The Committee decided to present/lay the Report to both the Houses of Parliament during the 
upcoming Session of the Parliament. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri Vivek 
Thakur, Chairman of the Committee and in his absence, Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari, M.P. to 
present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha. Shri Rajendra Agrawal, M.P. and in his absence, Shri 
Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi, M.P. were authorized to lay the above mentioned Reports on the 
Table of Lok Sabha. 
5. * * * 
   6.   The meeting adjourned at 11:01 A.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                       A.K. Mallick  
15th December, 2022                                                                                               Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Pertains to other matter 