132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
HUNDRED – THIRTY SECOND REPORT
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH REPORT ON IMPLEMENTATION OF
ELEMENTARY EDUCATION SCHEMES OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF ELEMENTARY EDUCATION & LITERACY (MINISTRY OF
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  10TH APRIL, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 10TH APRIL, 2003)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2003/ CHAITRA, 1925 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                             
PREFACE                                                                                                        
REPORT                                                                                                                                                                         
CHAPTER I    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have been         
                               
                        accepted by the Committee      
            CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of
the           
                                    Government’s reply
            CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  replies of the Government have not
been       
                                    accepted by the Committee   
            CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still
awaited
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                                                          
MINUTES                                                                                                                                                                 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2003)
 
Shri Arjun Singh           ¾¾    Chairman

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
 
MEMBERS
            RAJYA SABHA
 
Dr. Abrar Ahmed        
Dr. Akhilesh Das
Shri B.P. Apte 
Shri Bachani Lekhraj
Shri Eduardo Faleiro 
Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik
Shri Lalhmingliana
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey
Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav Ravi
Shri R. Sarath Kumar
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
Shri Mrinal Sen
Smt. Vanga Geetha
Prof. R.B.S. Varma
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shri Ambareesha
Shri Ramakant Angle
Shri Kirti Jha Azad
Shri G. S. Basavaraj
Shri Ram Rati Bind
Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria
Prof. Kailasho Devi
Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit
Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
Shri R.L. Jalappa
Shri Baliram Kashyap
Shri Brij Lal Khabri
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri Y.G. Mahajan
Shri  G.Mallikarjunappa
Dr. Manda Jagannath
Smt. Nivedita Mane
Shrimati Jas Kaur Meena
Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 29th  January, 2003
 
(i)
 
Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
Smt. Kumudini Patnaik
Smt. Renu Kumari
Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao
Shri Sunil Dutt
Shri Ramsheth Thakur
Dr. N. Venkataswamy
Smt. Ganti Vijaykumari

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
Vacant
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
PREFACE
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee, present this Hundred  Thirty-Second Report on Action Taken
by Government on the recommendations contained in the Hundred fourteenth Report on Implementation of Elementary
Education Schemes of the Department of Elementary Education & Literacy,  Ministry of Human Resource
Development.
2.         The Hundred fourteenth Report of the Committee related to Implementation of schemes of Elementary
Education in U.P., M.P., Bihar and Orissa.   It was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the
14
th March, 2003.  Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in this Report, received from the
Department of Elementary Education & Literacy, Ministry of Human Resource Development were considered by the
Committee on the 9th January, 2003. 
 
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report on action taken and adopted the same in its meeting held on 7
th
April, 2003.
 
 
NEW DELHI
April
  7, 2003 
Chaitra 17, 1925 (Saka)     
ARJUN SINGH
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development.
 
REPORT
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in its
Hundred Fourteenth Report on Implementation of Elementary Education Schemes the presented to Rajya Sabha and laid
on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 14
th March, 2002.
Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the 114th Report
were considered by the Committee and these have been categorized as follows:-
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies have been accepted by the Committee:  4.9, 4.12, 5.3, 7.1,
7.2(a), 8.3, 12.5  (Chapter I) Total- 7
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
3.3, 4.3, 4.13, 6.3, 7.2©, 7.2(e), 8.4, 9.2, 11.5                                                    (Chapter II)  Total- 9
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee: 4.5, 4.6, 4.11, 4.14, 4.15, 6.2, 7.2(b), 7.2(d), 7.3, 7.5, 10.5   (Chapter-III)  Total- 11
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still          awaited: 2.2, 3.2, 4.4,
5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 6.4     (Chapter IV) Total- 7
          The final replies in respect of the recommendations/observations made in Chapter IV of the Report are still
awaited from the Department.  The Committee may be apprised of the same as and when actions have been

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
taken.
CHAPTER I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT OPERATION BLACKBOARD
Observation/Recommendation
4.9       The Committee has been informed that Government of Orissa have decided to introduce the tribal primers in the
selected pilot schools with 100% tribal children, replacing the Oriya text books from current academic Session, July,
2001.   The same bi-lingual primers will be used as supplementary readers in bi-lingual and multi-lingual classes in
tribal areas.   While appreciating the action taken by the Government of Orissa, the Committee hopes that all schools in
the tribal areas will be covered at the earliest.
Action Taken
In Orissa, the bi-lingual primers have been developed in six tribal languages and have been supplied to all schools in
tribal areas of the DPEP districts. It has been planned to develop in four more tribal languages this year. These primers
as well as other supplementary materials like, teachers handbook in tribal languages, pictorial dictionary of tribal
languages etc. shall be provided to schools in tribal areas of non-DPEP districts under SSA programme.
In Madhya Pradesh, Bridge Language Inventory (BLI) has been developed in two districts – Shahdol and Betul and the
results had been encouraging. However, provision of recruitment of local teachers has reduced language problem for
communicating with children.
Observation/Recommendation
4.12     The Committee notes that 14,112 posts of additional teachers were sanctioned and appointed in Orissa for single
teacher primary schools existing on 30.9.1986.  The Committee, however, understands that single teacher schools are
still functioning in the State.    When asked to clarify, the Department replied that reasons  for existence of single
teacher primary schools may be that the State Government.  approved new primary schools with single teacher  after
30.9.86 or additional primary teachers appointed in single teacher schools under OB have been shifted to other schools.  
            The Committee feels that this is not a healthy position and remedial steps need to be taken by the State
Government concerned. This aspect should also be monitored  in SSA.
Action Taken
After sanction of 14,112 posts of additional teachers, rationalization of teachers based on Pupil -Teacher Ratio (PTR)
has been initiated which will reduce the number of single teacher schools.  In 2001-02, for the first time, rationalization
in teacher posting has been done.  Maximum 5% of teachers in a year come under rationalization process.  Hence, it will
take 2-3 years of time for total rationalization of teachers posting. The problem of single teacher schools would be
monitored in SSA.
RESTRUCTURING AND RE-ORGANISATION OF TEACHER EDUCATION
Observation/Recommendation
5.3       The Committee notes that not much progress has been made, so far as construction of DIETs in Bihar is
concerned.    Against 34 DIETs sanctioned,  grants for civil works have been released only for 18 and out of these 18,
proposed DIETs, only one building has been completed so far.    The Committee also observes that UP is the only State
where funds under Teacher Education Programme are being released.   In the case of the remaining three States of
Bihar, M.P. and Orissa, no funds have been released since 1998-99.   Non-receipt of any proposal has been given the
reason in  respect of Bihar.   The Committee feels that unspent balance of Rs. 705.07 lakhs and Rs. 50.60 lakhs with
M.P. and Orissa, respectively, may be  the reason for non-release of funds to them under this scheme.   The Committee,
however, fails to understand the reasons for annual release of funds to UP, inspite  of unspent balance of Rs. 57.10 lakhs
lying with the State.    The Committee is constrained to observe that no quarterly progress report is being sent by  Bihar.
The Committee recommends that submission of regular quarterly reports may be insisted from all States in order to
effectively monitor the scheme.  The Committee would also emphasise that matter of unspent balance should be
vigorously  pursued with the concerned States.
Action Taken
A total of 33 DIETs under the scheme of Restructuring and Reorganisation of Teacher Education  and 1 more DIET at
Ranchi under Bihar Education Project were sanctioned.  Out of this, 24 DIETs are in Bihar now and 10 are in
Jharkhand.  An amount of Rs.1173.30 lakhs was released to Bihar for construction work in DIETs and Rs.235.00 lakhs
as recurring grant to meet expenditure on salaries, training programme.  The Government of Bihar has been requested to
complete the construction work, as early as possible, and also divert  the amount which is due to Jharkhand.  Since the

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
utilisation report  for the amount already released is yet to be submitted by the State Government, further grants could
not be released.
The grants being released by the Ministry are of two types – Non-recurring grant for construction of Institute building
and purchase of equipment and Recurring grant to meet expenditure on salaries, training programmes, contingencies etc.
The unspent amount lying with the States generally represent the amount which were released to undertake construction
work in DIETs.  Since construction work is taken up in stages, the utilisation also takes time.  Further grants are
released only when first instalment is utilised and also for new project being sanctioned. In case of U.P. the unspent
balance mentioned in the report is the non-recurring grant released for civil work for DIET, Ambedkar Nagar, which
could not be utilised by the State Government in time and a carryforward permission has been allowed.  Similarly,
unspent amounts lying with M.P and Orissa were released for civil work. Recurring grant is released every year.  In case
of Bihar no further grant could be  released, either recurring or non-recurring, as utilisation of the earlier grant has not
been reported and no further proposal was received.  Grants released to Orissa, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh in
the last three years are as under:-
 
(Rs. in  Lakhs)
All the State Governments are regularly requested  to send the progress report and utilise the unspent amount of non-
recurring grant as early as possible.  In this direction, MoUs are also being signed with the States so that the State
Governments fulfill their commitments in implementation of the scheme. Meetings have been held with States to ensure
that unspent balance is utilised quickly.
DISTRICT PRIMARY EDUCATION PROGRAMME
Observation/Recommendation
7.1       The District Primary Education Programme was launched in 1994, as a major initiative to revitalize the primary
education system and to achieve the objective of universalisation of primary education.  It is a Centrally- sponsored
scheme with the Central Govt. contributing 85 per cent of the project cost and the State Governments contributing the
remaining 15 per cent.  The Central Government's contribution is resourced entirely through external funding.  17
districts of Bihar, 8 districts of Orissa, 56 districts of UP and 34 districts of MP are covered under  DPEP.   The
Committee was given to understand that the norms prescribed by the World Bank with regard to school buildings are
not flexible. The Committee desires that it  may be reviewed.
Action Taken
The World Bank and other funding agencies have not prescribed any norms for construction of school buildings.  The
design, specification etc. are decided by the project implementing agencies depending on the area of construction. Under
the DPEP guidelines, which were formulated with the approval of the Cabinet, the ceiling on civil works was prescribed
at 24% of the project cost. Keeping in view the demand from States, the ceiling has already been increased to 33%.
Since, for achieving the objective of universalisation of elementary education, other components like appointment of
additional teachers, teacher training, curriculum development, academic resource support, community mobilisation etc.
are also important, the above ceiling has been considered to be reasonable to keep the balance between the various
components. In fact, under the scheme of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, the same ceiling for civil works has been fixed.
 Observation/Recommendation
7.2       Committee’s attention has been drawn to the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year
ending March, 2000 (No. 3 of 2001).  Audit has reviewed the DPEP in 70 districts of 14 States including Bihar, Orissa,
MP and UP, covering the period from 1994-1995 to 1999-2000, during the period from October 1999 to July 2000. 
Major findings of the audit with special reference to these four States can be listed as follows:-
(a) UNDERUTILIZATION OF EXTERNAL AID
              Audit observed that the disbursements pledged by the funding agencies could not be utilised optimally.  For
DPEP Phase III Bihar, against its target of US Dollar 65.25 million, upto 31
st March 2000, IDA released only US
Dollars 16.448 million.  Reason attributed is low pace of expenditure.
Action Taken
The major reasons for low expenditure and consequent low disbursement under DPEP-III Bihar is non-filling up of

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
various posts including  teachers  by the State Government and time taken in sorting out contractual problems with the
Bihar State Textbook Publishing Corporation for printing and supply of textbooks. Disbursement in foreign exchange
has also been less than the targets due to exchange rate variations. The project is being restructured in consultation with
the World Bank and the proposal also includes extension of the project period by 2 years i.e. upto 30/9/2005 to ensure
full utilisation of committed external assistance and to achieve the planned targets.
JANSHALA PROGRAMME
Observation/Recommendation
8.3       The Committee is of the view that the  Scheme is in the initial stages of implementation and needs more time to
get the actual feedback about the scheme.  The Committee, however,  hopes that the observations made in the report of
the Bodh Shiksha Samiti will  help the Government in formulating its future strategy in regard to the Scheme. 
Action Taken
8.3       The report of the Bodh Shiksha Samiti has been circulated to all the programme States with direction to
formulate appropriate strategy for improving the classroom practices. All the States  have taken steps in this direction
through teacher training programmes and introduction of improved teaching-learning methods.
EDUCATION OF SC/ST CHILDREN
Observation/Recommendation
12.5     The Committee notes the ambitious interventions of the Government which have now become part of Sarva
Shiksha Abhiyan.  Since the SSA is still in initial stage of its implementation, the Committee can only hope that these
efforts will yield the desired result.  However, the Committee recommends accordingly that  such blocks/districts where
the tribal women literacy (as in the case of Orissa where it is merely 1.8%) is much below should be identified and
given special attention in the implementation of the scheme.
Action Taken
With a view to improving the position of girls education, it is also envisaged to provide additional inputs in the form of
various incentives and interventions like supply of free textbooks, uniforms, transport subsidy,  setting up of model
cluster schools, community mobilisation etc. by making suitable amendments in the scheme of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan.
An amount of Rs. 1,000 crores has been earmarked within the allocation of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan for additional 
interventions for promoting girls education in the 2198 educationally backward blocks where female literacy is lower
than the national average.
 CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
ENROLMENT & DROPOUT
Observation/Recommendation
3.3       The Committee feels that one of the major reasons is the lack of facilities in the habitations where there is no
provision for encouragement to study.  The teachers are also not attending the schools regularly.  The presence of the
education centre at a far off place from the scattered habitation is also not motivating the children from that area to
continue study.  In rural areas, the children are still helping their parents in farming and other household work for their
livelihood, which is discouraging them to attend the classes regularly.  In order to address these issues, necessary
provisions have to be made to open the schools in the vicinity of the scattered habitations, which has not been done. The
Committee observes that lack/absence of infrastructure and lack of motivation in teachers can be cited as the other main
reasons for high rate of drop out.  Besides all this, the economic factor, which is responsible to a great extent for this
continuing problem, has to be effectively dealt with through various incentives/ encouragement to needy and poor
children,  all of which are long pending. 
Action Taken
Agreeing to the observations of the Committee, it is stated that Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) provides for opening of
primary schools/EGS centres in all habitations where there is no schooling facility within 1 km. There is also provision
of teacher training and free textbooks to provide for better quality of education. Free textbooks and midday meal is
being provided as incentives to the children.
OPERATION BLACKBOARD
Observation/Recommendation
4.3       The Committee  observes that except U.P. none of the three States has been able to achieve the physical targets 
relating to construction of classrooms under the Scheme.    The States of Bihar, M.P. and Orissa have remained far away

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
from achievement of the target.   The Committee would also like to point out that these targets are based on the
requirement of classrooms in  1986.   Since  then, requirement of classrooms should  have increased manifold.   The
Committee is therefore, of the view that progress in construction of classrooms should be regularly monitored.
Action Taken
The scheme of Operation Blackboard, inter-alia, envisaged the provision of two reasonably large rooms, which
are usable in all weather with a deep veranda along with separate toilet facilities for boys and girls.  However, no
separate funds were being provided under OB by Ministry of HRD (Dept of Education) for construction of
primary school building.  Provision for this component of school building was made under the programmes of
Rural Employment like JRY and EAS.
As regards increase in the requirement of classrooms, the District Primary Education Programme (DPEP) and Sarva
Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) have provisions for meeting the additional requirements of classrooms.  There is an inbuilt
mechanism in these schemes/programmes for monitoring the achievements of civil works.
Observation/Recommendation
4.13     The Committee also noted instances of absenteeism of teachers or no teacher- in- charge of the schools during its
visits. The Committee finds such a situation very disturbing and unhealthy and is constrained to observe  that the
Department needs to take this matter very seriously with the concerned State Governments and impress upon them to
effectively deal with this unhealthy  situation in the interest of the students and also for prudent  expenditure of
Government funds.
Action Taken
The Department had been impressing upon the States from time to time to rationalize the deployment of teachers
in such a away that every primary school has at least two teachers, one of them should be a woman.  Further, the
Department has also been emphasizing that the replacement should be provided immediately if a teacher
appointed under OB is transferred to another school.
Under the SSA, States Governments have been advised to decentralize powers for appointment of teachers and their
posting in order to address this situation.
In Madhya Pradesh, the posting of teachers is being rationalised at the district level and the district planning committee
has been given the powers to take decision on rationalisation .The new policy of recruitment of contract teachers
envisages school specific posting of teachers and the services are non-transferable.  This has helped considerably in
eliminating the teacher absenteeism. Village Education Committees (VEC) in all the primary schools of the state have
been given powers to monitor teacher attendance in schools and with the activation of VEC there is visible increased
supervision and monitoring and reduction in teacher absenteeism.
In Uttar Pradesh, the State Government has issued orders for rationalization of teacher deployment.  It has banned any
transfers from rural areas to urban schools and has insisted on redeployment of existing teachers as per sanctioned
school strength.  Shiksha Mitras are appointed in a ratio of 2:3 with regular teachers, which in itself effects a
rationalization in the deployment of regular Assistant Teachers apart from improving the Teacher-pupil ratio.
In Bihar, teacher’s attendance is being monitored by Village Education Committees/Panchyati Raj Institutions.
In Orissa, Community supervision through School Committee (VEC) have reduced the incidence of teacher
absenteeism in DPEP districts.  Combined with this, administrative actions have been initiated against several truant
teachers.
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT TO PRIMARY EDUCATION (MID-DAY
MEAL SCHEME)
Observation/Recommendation
6.3       The Committee observes that situation is highly discouraging and disappointing in Bihar.  Out of the 57 districts
of undivided Bihar, in 15 districts there has been no lifting of foodgrains since 1998-99, in 26 districts no foodgrain has
been allocated since 1999-2000.  In the remaining districts also, lifting of foodgrains has been far below the allocated 
foodgrains. What is a cause of serious concern is that even these lifting figures furnished by the State Govt. do not
match with the off take figures furnished by the FCI.  The Committee finds that in Orissa, a declining trend is there in
the figures of foodgrains lifted since 1998-99.  In UP, situation is worse as during 2000-2001, against an allocation of
36,51,135 MTs only 8,19,218 MTs were lifted.  Similar position is observed in MP also. The Committee has been given
to understand that there is no provision of staff for implementation of Scheme both at Central and State levels with the
result that there is nobody to take responsibility for sending reports from districts to States and States to Centre.  The
Committee takes a serious view of this. The Committee is also of the opinion that provision of foodgrains instead of
cooked meals defeats the very purpose of the scheme.
Action Taken

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
The lifting of foodgrains in Bihar, MP, Orissa and UP has  improved considerably in 2001-02, which is given below:
 
 
With regard to requirement of reasonable staff for smooth implementation of the scheme it is submitted that Ministry of
Finance did not agree for any additional staff.
As regards provision of cooked meals is concerned, this Ministry agrees with the observation of the Committee. 
However, this Ministry has not been given any additional funds to support the States for putting in place a cooked meal
programme.
DISTRICT PRIMARY EDUCATION PROGRAMME
Observation/Recommendation
7.2 (C) ACCESS TO EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES
Status of infrastructure facilities under DPEP scheme during 1999-2000 as emerging in the data compiled by
Educational Consultants India Ltd in respect of Bihar, Orissa, M.P. and U.P. is as follows:
 
Action Taken
The District Primary Education Programme (DPEP) has been planned to provide only additional inputs over and above
other schemes in the State and Central Sectors for elementary education. The school infrastructure situation in most of
the project districts was very poor prior to the implementation of DPEP. As a result all districts had a huge infrastructure
gap to be filled up within limited funds. In the prioritization exercise that followed, school buildings in school less
habitations, buildingless schools and additional classrooms received a higher priority because of their direct influence
on access and retention. It was, therefore, not possible to bridge the entire infrastructure gap in the district only through
DPEP funds and gaps with regard to toilets, drinking water, repairs and additional classrooms therefore  still remain in
most districts. Under the financial parameters of the DPEP, there was a ceiling of 24% expenditure on civil works,
which has now been raised to 33-1/3%. Under DPEP, the position of new school buildings, additional classrooms and
toilets constructed/in progress upto 31.03.2002 in the concerned four states is as follows:
 
State School Buildings Addl. Class rooms Textiles
Bihar 658 1114 1035
M.P. 16550 4548 0
Orissa 990 778 1240
 
In Madhya Pradesh, construction of toilets is included in the school buildings or taken up under other schemes.
Convergence has been attempted  at the National level with the Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission to
address the issue of  water and sanitation in a more holistic way. Efforts would also be to fill in the remaining gaps
under the scheme of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA).
Observation/Recommendation
7.2 (E)   MONITORING AT THE CENTRAL LEVEL
At the Central level, the General Council was required to meet annually and the Project Board quarterly to monitor the
progress.  It was noticed that at the national level, during the review period (1994-2000) only one meeting of the
General Council was held in November 1997 and the Project Board held only seven meetings.

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
Action Taken
The Project Board meetings at the National level and the Executive Committee meetings of the DPEP Societies are
generally held regularly.  At the  national level,  efforts   will be made to  hold the next General Council Meeting at the
earliest.  States have also been advised to hold meetings of the General Body regularly. However, at national level,
officers and Consultants visit States and Districts at regular intervals and prepare reports on various components of
programme implementation. Similarly officers and Consultants from the project State visit blocks and districts
regularly.  Most of the States have developed indicators and formats to review and monitor the progress of the
programme implementation in blocks and districts.  The progress of the programme is also reviewed and monitored in
the quarterly Executive Committee meetings and the Governing Body meetings of the DPEP State Societies.  Internal
Supervision Missions (ISM) are launched as targeted missions for specific purposes as and when required.
JANSHALA PROGRAMME
Observation/Recommendation
8.4       The Committee observes that implementation of the Scheme  in all the above States is very slow and urgent
remedial measures need to be taken by the Department as the scheme is scheduled to run for only 18 months more i.e.
upto March, 2003.
Action Taken
Though, the programme started in 1998, its actual implementation was delayed due to various reasons, such as changes
in programme blocks, natural  calamities in some programme states and prolonged preparatory activities. Actual
implementation in most states could start only from March, 2000. The pace of implementation, however, picked up
during last two years. Out of the total expenditure of Rs 38.49 crore upto March 2002, Rs 30.67 crore has been spent
only in the last two years (2000-01 and 2001-02). The cumulative state-wise expenditure upto 31-07-2002 is Rs. 40.25
crore (AP - 6.44; Jharkhand – 2.83; Karnataka – 8.71; MP – 3.53; Chhattisgarh – 0.65; Maharashtra – 4.59; Orissa –
3.72; Rajasthan – 4.64; UP – 5.14).  Considering the delayed start of the programme and large anticipated savings in
approved project outlay, the duration of the programme has been extended for two years upto March, 2005 with the
concurrence of Ministry of Finance and partner UN agencies.
MERGER OF SCHEMES
Observation/Recommendation
9.2       The Committee welcomes the initiative taken in this regard,  The Committee, however, recommends that all the
inherent flaws of the earlier schemes should not be reflected in the revised new schemes after merger of these scheme. 
Therefore, the Committee  is of the view that wide ranging consultations  should be held with the State Governments,
who are the implementing authority before  arriving at a final decision.
Action Taken
Consultations were held with the States before taking decision on merger of various schemes under Sarva Shiksha
Abhiyan (SSA).
GIRLS' EDUCATION
Observation/Recommendation
11.5     The Committee hopes that all these measures and provisions under the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan will help in
promoting girl education, which is still elusive.
Action Taken
The observation of the Committee is noted.
CHAPTER III
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
OPERATION BLACKBOARD
Observation/Recommendation
4.5       Similarly in Bihar, school buildings of almost all the primary and upper primary schools both in rural and urban
areas visited by the Committee were not fit for use.   Either the roof was not there or floor was not properly laid.   To
our utter disappointment  there was no sign of any infrastructure worth-naming.   In some schools, furniture for fear of
theft, which did not seem to be fit for use was simply piled up in one of the rooms.   Not only this, in many schools, the
Committee was given to understand that additional classrooms/new buildings were in the state of construction for the
last three -five years.   Hand pumps and toilets were simply not there in majority of the schools.    Situation in Orissa

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
was also more or less, the same.  According to the own confession of the Secretary of the Department, girls toilets
existed only in 9.4 per cent of schools in Bihar, 10 per cent in Orissa and 28 per cent in U.P. against a national level of
23 per cent.
Action Taken
The main responsibility for the construction of primary school building, provision of amenities and infrastructure
facilities for these schools rests with State Governments and Union Territory Administrations. However, the Centrally
Sponsored Scheme of Operation Blackboard had specific provision for this purpose.  The Central assistance under OB
was contingent upon the State Governments and/or local bodies and/or the local community to take the responsibility of
providing contingency @ Rs. 500/- per annum for every primary school, provision of land and fencing and repair and
maintenance of school buildings.
The guidelines also state that provision of separate toilet for boys and girls must form part of the construction activity. 
Under DPEP there is a provision to provide school improvement grant @ Rs. 2000 per annum, besides provision for
repairs to school buildings and construction of toilets. The Operation Blackboard scheme has now been subsumed in
SSA.  Under SSA primary schools are provided with Rs. 5000/- per annum per school for repair and maintenance as per
the specific proposal approved by the School Committee.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee is constrained to observe that the Department has tried to evade its responsibility for the
proper implementation  of the Operation Blackboard by depending  totally on States/UTs  after passing on the
funds to them.   The fact remains that the Department has failed to ensure adherence to the specific  provisions/
guidelines under this scheme by the State Governments/UTs.     The Committee, further observes  that an
effective monitoring mechanism and application of accountability principle would go a long way in tackling this
perennial problem to a great extent.   Such an  indifference would only further reinforce the attitude of the
States/UTs. in this regard.
Observation/Recommendation
4.6       The Committee was informed that under DPEP, high level of priority is given to the repairs of school buildings. 
The Committee is, however, constrained to observe that although few schools visited by it were in the DPEP-covered
districts, their condition was as bad as the schools located in non-DPEP districts. The Committee has been informed that
the ceiling for civil works under DPEP has been increased from 24% to 33% which would enable the project states to
take up additional civil works including repairs.   The Committee has also been given to understand that with the
implementation of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan  throughout the country, there will be improvement in all the basic facilities
needed in a school as these issues have been adequately addressed  under  Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan   The Committee also
notes that under Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan,  provision has been made for the release of Rs. 5000/-  per annum for each
school for undertaking repair work.   While these enhanced norms are positive initiatives, the Committee would like to 
emphasise that there is a need for having an effective monitoring  mechanism to supervise the maintenance of school
buildings at all the levels - District, State and Central.   This is all the more necessary as Committee had noticed during
its visits that there was no accountability whatsoever on the part of concerned authorities. Whatever school buildings
found to be maintained satisfactorily were mainly due to community involvement.
Action Taken
Under DPEP, States are visited in rotation every six months by the Joint Review Mission (JRM), comprising
representatives from Government of India and donor agencies.  The report of the JRM is discussed with all the
representatives from States, the Department of Elementary Education & Literacy, Planning Commission, etc.  The final
report of JRM is sent to States for correction of deficiencies and the action taken.
SSA is building a monitoring mechanism, through quarterly reporting (A Project Management Information System), an
Educational Management Information System and by involving various Institutions/Departments of Education of
Universities.
           Under DPEP, community like Village Education Committees/School Management Committees are actively
involved in monitoring maintenance of school buildings.  Technical Support is provided by the engineering staff.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee strongly feels that it is high time that basic amenities and infrastructure in schools should
be put in place and officials responsible for non- performance  should be  taken to task.
Observation/Recommendation
 4.11    The Committee is also perturbed to observe, that release of funds under the Scheme of Operation Blackboard
during the last few years to Bihar has been held up due to unspent balance of Rs. 51.47 crores with the State and also
due to non-submission of the certificate from the Chief Secretary for the sanctioning of additional posts of Teachers for

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
Primary/Upper Primary schools.  The Committee takes a serious view of this.    The Committee is led to believe that the
State is not interested in taking the benefit of OB as not a single third teacher for primary schools with enrolment
exceeding 100 or additional teacher for upper primary schools has been sanctioned for the state under OB.   This  is of
serious concern specially in view of the fact that under SSA which would absorb OB,  expenditure on salary for teachers
between Centre and States is to be on 75:25 basis in Tenth plan in contrast to 100% financing   by Centre under OB.  
When the Central Govt. was giving 100% grant the State Govt. of Bihar could not take advantage of the same.  The
Committee has, therefore, serious reservation as to whether the State Govt. will ever agree for contributing 25% share
under Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan.
Action Taken
As regards sanctioning of additional posts of teachers for primary and upper primary schools to Bihar, consent of the
State Government for creation of the posts was required before according sanction to these posts.
Under the scheme of Operation Blackboard, teachers salaries for all new posts created are covered, though 100% for
salary payment till the end of Five Year Plan in which the appointments were made.  Thereafter, the liabilities with
regard to teacher salary were all transferred to the State Government.  Thus, provision for salary payment was for a
short period.    States generally used to get benefit for salary payment of teacher for 3 to 3 and half years only, as the
first two years were taken for completion of the recruitment procedures.  Under the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan,
reimbursement of salary for all new posts will be in the ratio of 75:25 during Tenth Plan and 50:50 thereafter.  Thus,
under SSA the provision of salary payments to teachers is for a longer period of time.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee notes with concern that the Department has given a non-specific reply to a very specific
point raised by it about the non-release of funds to Bihar under Operation Blackboard.   It appears that the
Department has not made all out efforts to get necessary formalities completed and release remaining balance in
time.   The Committee hopes that Department would gear itself up for making SSA during the Tenth Plan a
success in the light of experience it had in OB Scheme
Observation/Recommendation
4.14     The Committee finds that besides Bihar, unspent balance of Rs. 48.66 crore and 59.58 crore are lying
respectively with the State Govts. of M.P. and Orissa.   The Committee also notes that whereas in the case of  Bihar, no
funds have been released under OB  since 1998-99, funds continued to be released to MP and Orissa during this period
inspite of unspent balances lying with them.   The Committee would emphasise that the Department should vigorously
pursue the   matter of unspent balance with these States and closely monitor the proper utilisation of Central funds.
Action Taken
Under the scheme of Operation Blackboard, funds were released to States/UTs for procurement of Teaching Learning
Material (TLM) and towards payment of salary to the teacher for all the new posts created under the scheme for the Plan
period.
The unspent balance is mostly for procurement of TLM.  Funds for TLM were not released to Madhya Pradesh and
Orissa after the unspent balance with these States went upto Rs. 48.66 crore and Rs. 59.88 crore respectively.  
However, funds were released to these States towards payment of salary for teachers appointed during Ninth Plan
period.
The Department of Elementary Education and Literacy is vigorously pursuing the issue of unspent balance under the
scheme of Operation Blackboard with States/UTs including Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa.  The unspent balance in
case of Madhya Pradesh has come down to Rs. 40 lakhs only, after transferring Rs. 10.52 crore to Chhattisgarh.  The
unspent balance in respect of Orissa has also come down to Rs. 29.92 crore.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the funds have at last been utilized and the unspent balance
under the Scheme of Operation Blackboard with States/UTs., was coming down.   The Committee hopes the
Department would continue its efforts to liquidate  the unspent balance lying with the States/UTs.
Observation/Recommendation
4.15        On the basis of the information furnished, the Department has  tried to give an impression to the Committee
that the various components of the scheme have been achieved upto a satisfactory level.  But on the contrary, the
Committee on its visit to these States,  found the ground reality altogether different. The Committee finds a wide gap
between the information furnished by the Department  to it and the ground reality.   It, therefore, recommends that
physical verification of various components of the scheme should be undertaken to ensure that the funds allocated in 
this regard are properly  utilised.
 

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
Action Taken
The valuable observations of the Committee regarding monitoring various components of the scheme(s) are being kept
in view while reviewing the implementation of DPEP and SSA.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee is not satisfied with the reply.  It appears that an attempt has been made to evade ground
realities.   The Committee reiterates the need for physical verifications of various components of Operation
Blackboard to ensure that the funds allocated in this regard are properly utilized.   The Committee would like
the Government to report back after doing the necessary survey.
 MID-DAY MEAL SCHEME
Observation/Recommendation
6.2       Divergent views were expressed, for and against, the scheme during the visit of the Sub-Committee to the
States.  The State Governments complained that they have no resources to lift the foodgrains under this scheme. 
Moreover, problems were also being faced in foodgrains reaching the school premises. Complaints of mishandling of
foodgrains were also there.  In some cases, the Committee found that where the foodgrains had been lifted by the State
Governments, its quality was very poor and in some of the cases it was not even fit for consumption.  Even the cooked
meal was not upto the mark, what to talk of nutrition for the children. The Committee also observed that adequate
publicity has not been given to this scheme.  As a result, in many schools, authorities were not aware about this scheme. 
The Committee finds that even as per the evaluation conducted by the Operations Research Group, the scheme had
partial impact on the enrolment, attendance and retention of children in a few States.
Action Taken
With regard to the issue of low lifting of food-grains,  it is stated that the Central Govt. is reimbursing Rs. 50/-
per quintal for lifting and transportation of foodgrains.  Therefore, it is not correct  on the part of States to say
that they have no resources to lift foodgrains.
In so far as mishandling of foodgrains is concerned, States have already initiated remedial action. For further
strengthening of supervision system, Chief Secretaries have also been advised to arrange for  surprise visits of their
senior officers to schools. 
For ensuring supply of only Fair Average   Quality of foodgrains, Joint Inspection Teams have been constituted
consisting of officers of the FCI  and the respective State Governments.
In so far as publicity of the programme is concerned All India Radio has already made publicity through their Regional
Stations.  The Ministry has also taken up with the Information & Broadcasting Ministry to feature the programme in
Doordarshan. Implementing agencies have also been requested to sensitize the school education forums, such as Village
Education Committees, School Management Committees etc.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee observes that the issues of transportation and quality of foodgrains be monitored closely
with the help of Central and State agencies involved.
DISTRICT PRIMARY EDUCATION PROGRAMME
Observations/Recommendations
7.2 (B)  MIS-UTILISATION AND DIVERSION OF FUNDS
Funds provided under DPEP are to be used for DPEP related activities approved by the Project Board.  As per financial
parameters prescribed in the DPEP guidelines, DPEP would not finance non-educational incentives such as free
uniforms, incentive for attendance, nutrition etc.  Position with respect to the four States is as follows:
 

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
 
Action Taken
Government of India does not provide funds for items/activities, which are not permitted under the DPEP Guidelines.
As per DPEP guidelines, the list of activities to be funded under the programme is not exhaustive.  There is a provision
in the guidelines that as the programme evolves and new activities come up, the eligibility for DPEP financing will be
decided by the Project Board at the National level.
The project States have been instructed to strictly follow the provisions of the financial parameters stipulated under the
DPEP Guidelines.  They have also been advised to introduce proper internal audit system and strengthen internal checks
so that expenditure is not incurred on items, which are not covered under DPEP norms.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee expresses its serious concern about the diversion of funds to activities other then
permitted under the DPEP.  It takes a serious view of the attitude of the Department towards this practice that
has been going on since 1994 in case of some States.   The Committee emphasizes the urgent need for evolving
ways and means for ensuring that the funds were utilized for the purpose for which these are allocated.  
(D)       DEPLOYMENT OF TEACHERS
          While it is not a stipulation, DPEP had emphasized the presence of female teachers in primary schools so as to
enhance the participation of girls in school education. State-wise position of schools without having a single female
teacher is as given below:
Practice of deployment of teachers was not followed in actual practice.  In U.P., due to non- appointment and placement
of teachers in a  planned manner, teacher-student  ratio ranged between 1:56 and 1:134 in nine project districts.  In
Orissa, against 1468 posts of teachers sanctioned for 734 new schools, 741 teachers were deployed during 1999-2000 by
diverting them from non-DPEP schools.
Action Taken
Teacher  vacancies  are  to be filled  by the  States.  Under  DPEP, however, through analysis of the District 
Information  System  of  Education (DISE) data, concerted efforts have been made to point out to the States the need to

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
rationalise teachers’ deployment. States are taking adequate steps to position teachers by appointment or re-
deployment.  More emphasis is given by the States to appoint large number of female teachers.
             In Uttar Pradesh, 21,851 teachers have been appointed under DPEP to improve the pupil- teacher ratio. The
State Government has reserved 50% seats for female in BTC training course being conducted through DIETs, so that,
these female teachers may be posted in primary schools to ensure more participation of women in primary education. 
The State Government has also reserved 50% of posts of Shiksha Mitras for women.
             In Bihar, the percentage of female teachers is low due to non availability of trained female teachers in adequate
numbers.
             In Orissa, the PTR was 1:33 during 1998-99 and 1999-2000 and 1:32 during 2000-2001 which shows
improvement in PTR. 
             In Madhya Pradesh, 8522 Shiksha Karmis and 19196 additional teachers have been appointed under DPEP to
improve the pupil- teacher ratio.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that restructuring as well as extension of the Project has been
taken up with the World Bank and hopes it would be done soon.  As regards  deployment of female teachers in
primary schools, much more remains to be done. This scheme which aim at improving PTR, quality of education
as well as gender bias in primary education, should not be allowed to languish.
Observation/Recommendation
7.3       Other shortcomings pointed out in the audit report are negative growth in enrolment of girls and SC/ST students,
poor reach of incentives to eligible groups, lack of community focus, inadequate training of teachers, etc.
Action Taken
The observation  is noted and the necessary action taken notes have already been furnished to the Public Accounts
Committee (PAC).
Comments of the Committee
              The Committee is of the view that the action taken in response to its recommendations should be
submitted to this Committee.   The evasive reply of the Department smacks of its lackadaisical attitude towards
the Committee.  The  Committee takes serious note of it and advises the Department to refrain from such
practices in future. 
Observation/Recommendation
7.5       The Committee is not convinced by the reply of the Department. The Committee notes that as mentioned in the
CAG Report  records relating to the Programme maintained in the State Project Offices, District Project Offices of the
selected districts and Department of Education were test checked by Audit to assess the extent to which the programme
objectives were  achieved.  In addition, ORG-Centre for Social Research conducted a survey of 54 districts, 1081
villages, 280 Census Enumeration Blocks(CEB), 22 SCERTs, 150 BRCs, 153 CRCs, 1361 schools  across 14 States. 
The agency contacted 40,844 households, 2451 teachers,  3161 members of VECs etc.  Survey was carried out using
both quantitative (primary survey using pre-tested beneficiary schedules) and qualitative (in-depth interview with
programme functionaries) techniques. The Committee is of the opinion that observations of CAG need to be looked into
seriously and shortcomings reported by them should be addressed suitably.  The Committee finds that unspent balances
under DPEP  amounting to Rs.1100.75 lakhs, Rs.3008.64 lakhs, 1351.61 lakhs and 5018.73 lakhs are lying with Bihar,
M.P., Orissa and U.P., respectively. This itself is an indication that DPEP is not functioning satisfactorily.
Action Taken
The programme is supervised through periodic Supervision Missions.  So far, 11 Internal Supervision Missions and 15
Joint Review Missions (comprising  representatives of Government of India and External Funding Agencies) have been
carried out.  The  first  phase of the programme,  which  was  launched in November, 1994  in 42 districts  in 7 States
was  subjected  to an  In-depth   Review  during  September-October, 1997.  The 2nd In-depth Review was conducted in
November, 1999-2000.  The reviews and various evaluation studies of the programme have brought out that the
programme has resulted in significant increase in enrolment, improvement in learning achievement, reduction in
repetition rates/drop-outs with increased community involvement, improvements in classroom processes.
Regarding unspent balances with the project states, under the DPEP guidelines and agreements with the funding
agencies, funds are required to be released to the State Implementation Societies in advance to meet the requirements of
next six months.  The amounts shown as unspent funds in the beginning of the financial year also include the funds
released by the Government of India at the end of the previous financial year, which are actually received by the state
societies in the next financial year. Actual funds available with the concerned four states as on 01.07.2002 were          
Rs. 1.05 crores in respect of Bihar, Rs. 37.65 crores in respect of Madhya Pradesh, Rs. 16.45 crores in respect of Orissa

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
and Rs. 37.01 crores in respect of Uttar Pradesh.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is not satisfied with the Departments' reply and reiterates its earlier recommendation made in
Para 7.5 of the 114th Report.  
SARVA SHIKSHA ABHIYAN
Observation/Recommendation
10.5   The Committee recommends that provision for girls hostels especially in far flung areas should be made one of
the components  of SSA before it is implemented.
Action Taken
Girls’ residential schools can be opened under the innovative component of SSA, under which the District can spend Rs.
15.00 lakhs on any activity for furthering girls’ education. Further, the Department is also examining the launching of
another scheme Kasturba Gandhi Swantantra Vidyalaya Scheme under which residential schools would be opened for
girls of SC, ST and OBC classes.
In Uttar Pradesh, provision of residential school facility has been made in the SSA plans of district, Allahabad, Banda &
Chitrakoot. Besides, Bridge courses/Residential camps have been provided for far-flung areas in each of 16 SSA
districts under Education Guarantee Scheme Alternative & Innovative Education Programme.
In Orissa, 369, out of 400 residential Girls’ Hostels have been opened in the tribal districts.
In Madhya Pradesh, the facility of girls’ hostels already exists in many parts of the tribal districts of the State. However,
the component of girls’ education has been given due consideration while formulating SSA perspective plan.
Comments of the Committee
            The scheme of opening more and more residential schools in remote/tribal areas is a good scheme which
would provide necessary ambience and amenities to the girl child from underprivileged classes.    What is more
important in this respect is the attitude/response of parents in sending girls to these hostels.   The Committee
hopes that this aspect also is being taken up simultaneously.
CHPATER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
STATUS OF ELEMENTARY EDUCATION
Observation/Recommendation
2.2       The Committee observes that whereas overall literacy rate as per the Census 2001 figures in Madhya Pradesh
and Orissa is almost at par with the national average, Bihar and UP are much below the national average.   The
Committee is constrained to note that actually the situation is much worse and serious even in the states as mentioned in 
the Census 2001.  There is wide variation in male and female literacy rates in all the four states.   In Madhya Pradesh,
female literacy rate is 50.28 against the national average of 54.16.   There are 3-4 districts in the State where female
literacy rate is far below the State average of 50.28.   As per the information (NSSO 1997) made available to the
Committee, female literacy rate in Orissa is 38 per cent which might have somewhat improved in Census, 2001.  
However, the Committee during its visits of some districts in the State having a sizeable SC/ST population, found  the
situation  very bad.   The visit revealed out into the surface that actual literacy and female literacy  situation, in
particular, has been suppressed very conveniently in the NSSO figures. The figures were misleading.  Literacy rate in
these districts was nowhere near the State average.   The Committee was surprised to note that in certain tribal districts
in Orissa, literacy rate amongst tribal women was merely 1.8 percent which is perhaps the lowest in the entire country.  
Similarly in Bihar, the Committee observed that besides the overall literacy rate being much below the national average
as brought out in Census  2001, female literacy rate was a cause of serious concern.    Female literacy rate of 34 as
compared to the national average 50 (NSSO 1997)  is self-explanatory.   Committee's experience after visiting 4-5
districts in Bihar was very discouraging.   In all the districts, literacy rates, particularly female literacy rates were  very
low.
Action Taken
The observation of the Committee is noted.
ENROLMENT AND DDROPOUT
Observation/Recommendation
3.2       The Committee was informed that district-wise drop-out figures are  maintained  in respect of DPEP districts
only at national level.  The Committee observes that in quite a few districts covered by DPEP in all the four states, drop

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
out rates in respect of both girls and boys was very  high and quite contrary to the perception indicated from the figures. 
The Committee notes that the main reasons for high dropouts, as assessed by the National Family Health Survey – II
conducted in 1998-99, are lack of  interest in studies,  private cost of education being too high and the need for them to
work - both in their own farms / business / households or outside for remuneration.  The Committee has been given to
understand that these reasons  constitute almost 75% of the cases of dropouts.  The Committee is not, however, inclined
to agree  with this assessment. 
Action Taken
The assessment of drop-outs has been made on the basis of the survey carried out by the National Family Health Survey
1998-99. However, to identify the exact reasons for such drop-outs, a study is being undertaken in 6 States of Assam,
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, where drop-outs have been found to be very high. The
study is expected to be completed by December, 2002.
 
OPERATION BLACKBOARD
Observation/Recommendation
4.4       The Committee categorically  records its reservations about the figures regarding status of primary school
buildings in these States. Its experience in respect of both primary and upper primary school buildings has been totally
different.  The Committee during its visits found most of the school buildings in dilapidated condition.   During its
unscheduled visits, it found that some of the Govt. Schools in U.P. existed on paper only.   At some places, the
classrooms had all the junk and broken furniture stored.   Most of the schools were found to be without a boundary wall
which made the retention of students in the school all the more difficult.   Toilet and drinking water facilities were
available  in very few schools.  Even in few schools where these facilities existed, toilets were found  to be stinking.  
They were not being properly maintained at all.   In many cases, water taps/ hand pumps were not working for a long
time and needed repair.
Action Taken
The observation of the Committee is noted.
RESTRUCTURING AND RE-ORGANISATION OF TEACHER EDUCATION
Observations/Recommendations
5.4       The Committee was  informed by the Department that in order to assess the technical and infrastructural capacity
of DIETs, a national evaluation was initiated by NIEPA in November 1997.  The draft reports for DIETs of all the
States including those in Bihar, MP, Orissa and UP, have been sent to the concerned States to obtain their comments/
observations before the final draft National Evaluation Report is prepared by NIEPA. The Department further submitted
that while modifications based on the reports of NIEPA  will be considered during the 10
th Plan period, some changes
like the norms for recurring and non-recurring financial assistance to the States have been revised upward by about 50%
in 1999 following past experience.   Memoranda of Understandings (MoUs) are to be signed with State Governments in
order to ensure more effective DIETs.
Action Taken
MOUs have already been signed by 11 States namely: Orissa, Tripura, Meghalaya, Karantaka, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil
Nadu, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan and Punjab.  Action is being taken to get the MOUs signed by
the remaining States/UTs.
Observation/Recommendation
5.5       As regards the general attitude and behaviour of teachers, the Department stated that a  training in the
behavioural aspects of teachers is included in all training programmes of DIET.  In DPEP, behavioural aspects involving
motivation, activity based and joyful learning, gender sensitisation etc., are covered under the Teacher Training
programmes.  Various measures have also been suggested in the ‘Curriculum Framework for Quality Teacher
Education’ brought out by National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE) in 1998 which will be implemented in due
course.
Action Taken
The observation of Committee is noted.
Observation/Recommendation
5.6       The Committee, despite various training and sensitization  programmes for teachers, is deeply perturbed over the
general attitude and behaviour of teachers towards the students in recent times.     It regrets to note that there is a general
erosion in the devotion and dedication of teachers towards their duties as compared in the past.    The noble bond of
teacher and the taught is entirely missing and commercialisation and parochialism have now taken its place.   The

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
Committee feels that production of good teachers is a great challenge before the country.   Good teachers are the makers
of the country.    All concerned will have to put their heads together to face this challenge otherwise the future of the
country will not be so bright as hoped.
Action Taken
The observation of Committee is noted.
MID-DAY MEAL SCHEME
Observation/Recommendation
6.4       The Committee notes that a Sub-group was constituted under the aegis of Working Group on Elementary
Education and Literacy for formulation of Tenth Plan and it has suggested major changes in the scheme.  The
Committee would, however, like to express its reservations about the recommendation of the Sub-group with regard to
expansion of the programme to cover the children studying in Alternative Schools.  The Committee is of the view that
the Mid-day Meal Scheme should be restricted to the formal schools for the time being. Steps should be taken to
effectively implement this scheme.  Efforts should also be made to provide cooked meal only under this programme. 
The Committee recommends that the changes suggested by the Sub-Group and the shortcomings/constraints noticed by
this Committee  be given due weightage when modifications under Tenth Plan are made. The State Governments/UT
Administrations also need to be taken into confidence before revision of the Scheme.
Action Taken
The observation of the Committee is noted.
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee is constrained to observe that the Department has tried to evade its responsibility for the
proper implementation  of the Operation Blackboard by depending  totally on States/UTs  after passing on the
funds to them.   The fact remains that the Department has failed to ensure adherence to the specific  provisions/
guidelines under this scheme by the State Governments/UTs.     The Committee, further observes  that an
effective monitoring mechanism and application of accountability principle would go a long way in tackling this
perennial problem to a great extent.   Such an  indifference would only further reinforce the attitude of the
States/UTs. in this regard. (Para 4.5)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee strongly feels that it is high time that basic amenities and infrastructure in schools should
be put in place and officials responsible for non- performance  should be  taken to task. (Para 4.6)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee notes with concern that the Department has given a non-specific reply to a very specific
point raised by it about the non-release of funds to Bihar under Operation Blackboard.   It appears that the
Department has not made all out efforts to get necessary formalities completed and release remaining balance in
time.   The Committee hopes that Department would gear itself up for making SSA during the Tenth Plan a
success in the light of experience it had in OB Scheme. (Para 4.11)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the funds have at last been utilized and the unspent balance
under the Scheme of Operation Blackboard with States/UTs., was coming down.   The Committee hopes the
Department would continue its efforts to liquidate  the unspent balance lying with the States/UTs. (Para 4.14)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee is not satisfied with the reply.  It appears that an attempt has been made to evade ground
realities.   The Committee reiterates the need for physical verifications of various components of Operation
Blackboard to ensure that the funds allocated in this regard are properly utilized.   The Committee would like
the Government to report back after doing the necessary survey. (Para 4.15)
 COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee observes that the issues of transportation and quality of foodgrains be monitored closely 
with the help of Central and State agencies involved. (Para 6.2)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee expresses its serious concern about the diversion of funds to activities other then
permitted under the DPEP.  It takes a serious view of the attitude of the Department towards this practice that
has been going on since 1994 in case of some States.   The Committee emphasizes the urgent need for evolving

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
ways and means for ensuring that the funds were utilized for the purpose for which these are allocated.   (Para
7.2)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that restructuring as well as extension of the Project has been
taken up with the World Bank and hopes it would be done soon.  As regards  deployment of female teachers in
primary schools, much more remains to be done. This scheme which aim at improving PTR, quality of education
as well as gender bias in primary education, should not be allowed to languish. (Para 7.2)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
              The Committee is of the view that the action taken in response to its recommendations should be
submitted to this Committee.   The evasive reply of the Department smacks of its lackadaisical attitude towards
the Committee.  The  Committee takes serious note of it and advises the Department to refrain from such
practices in future.  (Para 7.3)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is not satisfied with the Departments' reply and reiterates its earlier recommendation made in
Para 7.5 of the 114
th Report.   (Para 7.5)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The scheme of opening more and more residential schools in remote/tribal areas is a good scheme which
would provide necessary ambience and amenities to the girl child from underprivileged classes.    What is more
important in this respect is the attitude/response of parents in sending girls to these hostels.   The Committee
hopes that this aspect also is being taken up simultaneously. (Para 10.5)
MINUTES
SECOND  MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 9
th  January, 2003 in Committee Room No. 139, First Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
Shri Arjun Singh           ¾¾    Chairman
MEMBERS
            RAJYA SABHA
 
Dr. Abrar Ahmed
Shri Bachani Lekhraj
Shri Lalhmingliana
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey
Prof. R.B.S. Varma
LOK SABHA
Shri Kirti Jha Azad
Shri G. S. Basavaraj
Shri Ram Rati Bind
Shri Baliram Kashyap
Shri Brij Lal Khabri
Shri Y.G. Mahajan
Dr. Manda Jagannath
Smt. Nivedita Mane
Smt. Jas Kaur Meena
Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
Smt. Kumudini Patnaik
Smt. Renu Kumari
Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
Shri H.K. CHanana, Joint Secretary
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
  2.       At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. The Committee then took-up for
consideration the Action Taken Note on 120
th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants for 2002-2003 relating
to Department. of Secondary and Higher Education and identified  the following points/ issues for clarifications from
the Department:
Criteria/guidelines regarding opening of Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas (JNVs).
Criteria/guidelines regarding opening of Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs).
Admission procedure in KVs specially in Parliamentary Constituencies where there are no KVs.
Transfer Policy of Teachers/Staff in KVs specially posting of both husband and wife at the same station.
Slow pace of construction of JNVs and KVs .
Improvement in school Laboratories and Libraries.
Transfer  of students of JNVs to different states as part of national integration leading to aberration and frustration
among students.
Vacancies of teachers and staff in Colleges and Universities and Role of UGC in filling of vacancies.
Status of Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) regarding implementation of reservation policy.
Implementation of the scheme for Education of SC/ST Girls in Rajasthan, non-release of funds on time and diversion of
funds for other purposes.
Underutilisation of funds under various heads like UGC, NCERT, etc.
Neglect of Research activities in NCERT.
Undue delay in making the National Council of Rural Institutes (NCRI) functional.
2.1       The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 113
th Report of the Committee on
Technical Education relating to Department. of Secondary and Higher Education and identified  the following points/
issues for clarifications of the Department:
Emphasis on increase in number of students in Govt. Engineering colleges than Private Engineering Colleges to enable
poor students to get engineering education.
Staffing pattern of All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE). Presently, most of the Manpower is on
deputation.
General complaints regarding recognition of Private Institutions not fulfilling the requisite standard.
Uniformity in educational qualifications prescribed for various technical courses like Engineering, Architecture,
Pharmacy etc.
2.2       The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 114
th Report of the Committee on
Implementation of Elementary Education Schemes relating to Department. of Elementary Education and Literacy. The
Committee was of the view that the Education  Secretaries  of some of the states  be heard by it in respect of
implementation of various elementary education schemes in their respective states.
2.3       The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 121
st  Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants for 2002-2003 relating to Department of Women and Child Development and  identified the
following points/issues for clarifications of the Department:
Status regarding increase in the honorarium of Anganwadi workers and Anganwadi Helpers.
Non-availability of proper structure/building for running Anganwadi Centres.
Review of the Schemes of Indira  Mahila  Yojana  and  Rashtriya  Mahila Kosh in view of the general impression that
these Schemes are not achieving their objectives of economic empowerment of poor women.
Utility of Short Stay Homes. 
 
2.4       The Committee was also of the view that it should visit the states of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala to have
on-the-spot study of the implementation of the various schemes/ programmes related to women.
2.5     The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 122
nd   Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants for 2002-2003 relating to Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and identified the following
points/issues for clarifications of the Department:
Non-adherence of instructions regarding associating the MPs with the activities of Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan
(NYKS).

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
Under-utilisation of funds under National Service Scheme (NSS).
Shrinking of activities under National Service Scheme (NSS) and Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS).
Utilisation and maintenance of stadia after International events.
3.         The Committee, then, adjourned at 12.30 P.M. for lunch  and then again adjourned at 4.30 P.M. to meet again at
2.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 21
st January, 2003.
 
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 7th April, 2003 in Committee Room `A`,  First Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
1.         Dr. Manda Jagannath                ¾¾    in the Chair
MEMBERS
            RAJYA SABHA
 
Dr. Akhilesh Das
Shri B.P. Apte
Shri Bachani Lekhraj
Prof. R.B.S. Varma
Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik
Shri Lalhmingliana
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey
Smt. Vanga Geetha
LOK SABHA
Shri Ram Rati Bind
Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria
Shri Baliram Kashyap
Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
Shri S.B.P.B.K.Satyanarayana Rao
Dr. N. Venkataswamy
SECRETARIAT
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
2.          In the absence of the Chairman, Dr. Manda Jagannath was voted to the Chair.
3.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up 
consideration of the following Reports:
One Hundred twenty-fifth Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
One Hundred sixteenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of
Health;
One Hundred twenty-sixth Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
One Hundred seventeenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of
Family Welfare;
One Hundred twenty-seventh Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained
in One Hundred eighteenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy;
One Hundred twenty-eighth Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
One Hundred-nineteenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of
Elementary Education and Literacy;
One Hundred twenty-ninth Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
One Hundred twentieth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of

132ReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report132th.htm[01-07-2016 16:10:53]
Secondary and Higher Education;
One Hundred thirtieth Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in One
Hundred twenty-first Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of
Women and Child Development;
One Hundred thirty-first Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
One Hundred twenty-second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Ministry of
Youth Affairs and Sports;
One Hundred thirty-second  Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in One Hundred fourteenth Report of the Committee on Implementation of Elementary Education Schemes;
One Hundred thirty-third  Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
One Hundred twelfth Report of the Committee on Medical Education; and
One Hundred thirty-fourth  Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
One Hundred thirteenth Report of the Committee on Technical Education.
4.         After some discussion,  the Committee adopted the above reports. The Committee also decided that these 
Report may be presented to Rajya Sabha and /laid in Lok Sabha  on the 10
th April, 2003.  The Committee, in this
connection, authorized the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence Prof. R.B.S. Varma and  Smt. Chandra Kala
Pandey  to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and  Dr. M. Jagannath and in his absence Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit
to lay the same in the Lok Sabha. 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 P.M.
 
 
 
 
 
 