 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2021 /Agrahayana,1943, (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report No 
333 
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY THIRD REPORT  
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Three 
Hundred and Twenty Sixth Report on the Demands For 
Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 30th November,2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30th November,2021) 


 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Three Hundred and Twenty Sixth Report on the 
Demands For 
Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 30th November, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30th November,2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2021 /Agrahayana,1943, (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ….................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................  (iii) 
3.  ABBREVIATIONS............................................................................................ (iv)-(v) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…................  1-24 
Chapter-I  -   Observations/recommendations which have been accepted  
 by the Government ...............................................................    2-10 
Chapter -II  -  Observations/recommendations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies.............   11-18 
Chapter-III -  Observations/recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee...   19-23 
 Chapter-IV Observation/recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government is still awaited…..     24 
   
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE..   25-26 
6. MINUTES.....................................................................................................   27-28 
7. ANNEXURE………………………………………………………………………………  29-32 
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri R. S. Bharathi  
3. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
4. * Ms. Sushmita Dev  
5. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad  
7. Shri K. C. Ramamurthy  
8. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
9. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
10. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Shri D. M Kathir Anand 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
16. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
17. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
18. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
19. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
20. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
21.  Shri Balak Nath 
22.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
23.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
24.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
25.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
26. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
27. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
28.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
29. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
30. Shri S. Venkatesan 
31. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
---------------------------------- 
* Nominated w.e.f. 27.09.2021 
 
 
 
(i)

   
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
Shri Shri A.K. Mallick, Director 
Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer (in-situ) 
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby pres ent this Three Hundred and Thirty Third  Report of 
the Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on t he Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Three Hundred and Twenty Sixth Report on the Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of 
the Ministry of Women and Child Development. The Action Taken Replies were received from 
the Ministry of Women and Child Development vide their communication dated 23rd July, 2021. 
2. Three Hundred and Twenty Sixth Report of the Department -Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports was presented to Rajya 
Sabha on 16th March, 2021 and simultaneously laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16th March, 2021 
and Replies of the Government to the observations/recommendations contained in the Report were 
considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 26th November, 2021. 
3.  The Committee cons idered the d raft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 
26th November, 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)
  NEW DELHI                                                                                    
  26th November, 2021 
  Agrahayana  / 1943 (Saka)                                                               
 
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on   Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
 
AWC  Anganwadi Centre 
AWH  Anganwadi Helper 
AWW  Anganwadi Worker 
BBBP  Beti Bachao Beti Padhao 
BE  Budget Estimate 
CAMPA Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act 
CARA  Central Adoption Resource Authority 
CCI  Child Care Institution 
CSWB  Central Social Welfare Board 
DEA  Department of Economic Affairs 
DELNET Developing Library Network 
DoE  Department of Expenditure 
DoFPD Department of Food and Public Distribution 
DoPT  Department of Personnel and Training 
ECCE  Early Childhood Care and Education 
FNB  Food and Nutrition Board 
GeM Government e-Marketplace 
GFR General Financial Rules 
ICDS  Integrated Child Development Services 
ICT Information and Communications Technology 
JJ Act Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 
JJB  Juvenile Justice Board 
M/oRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MeitY Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
MHA  Ministry of Home Affairs 
MoH&FW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MoPR  Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
MoRD Ministry of Rural Development 
MoSPI  Ministry of Statistics and Program Implementation 
MoU  Memorandum of Understanding 
MWCD Ministry of Women and Child Development 
NBA News Broadcasters Association 
NCPCR National Commission for Protection of Child Rights 
NCRB  National Crime Records Bureau 
 
(iv) 

 
 
 
NCW  National Commission for Women 
NeGD National e-Governance Division 
NEP  National Education Policy 
NHFS  National Family Health Survey 
NIPCCD National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development 
NNP National Nutrition Park 
OSC  One Stop Centre 
PCMA, 2006 Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 
PMMVY Pradhan Mantri MatruVandana Yojana 
PRI  Panchayati Raj Institution 
RE  Revised Estimate 
RMK   Rashtriya Mahila Kosh 
SAM Severe Acute Malnutrition 
SCPCR State Commission for the Protection of Child Rights 
SH Act Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and 
Redressal) Act, 2013 
SNP Supplementary Nutrition Programme 
SoP  Standard Operating Procedure 
THR Take Home Ration 
UT  Union Territory 
VHSNC Village Health, Sanitation and Nutrition Committee 
WHL  Women Helpline 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Committee 
on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the observations/reco mmendations contained in its 3 26th Report on the Demands for Gra nts 
2021-22 of the Ministry of W omen and Child Development , which was presented to the Rajya 
Sabha and laid on the table of Lok Sabha on 16th March, 2021. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of observations/recommendations con tained in above 
mentioned Report were received from the Ministry of Women and Child Development  vide their 
communication dated 23rd July, 2021. These have been categorized as follows.  
 Chapter I: Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
Paras - 2.5, 3.4, 3.11, 3.22, 3.24, 3.25, 3.29, 3.31, 3.32 
Total - 9 
Chapter II: Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of Government's replies:- 
Paras – 3.1, 3.5, 3.9, 3.14, 3.19, 3.20, 3.21, 3.23, 3.26, 3.27 
Total - 10 
Chapter III: Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:- 
Paras- 2.10, 3.3, 3.13, 3.17 
Total - 4 
       Chapter-IV:  Observation/recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government is 
still awaited:- 
Paras - Nil 
Total - Nil 
 

2 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Observation/recommendation 
1. The Committee is of the view that there has been a constant decrease in the budget 
estimate of the Ministry vis -à-vis the Government of India Budget. RE 2020 -21 has also been 
significantly reduced as compared to BE 2020 -21. Th e Committee recommends that though the 
Ministry has re-vamped a lot of the schemes into new missions, the allocation in BE 2021 -22 has 
been reduced significantly which might hamper implementation of the new missions. The Ministry 
should, therefore, make an  in-depth analysis of the new missions and schemes thereunder and 
seek additional funds from the Ministry of Finance at RE stage, if required.  
(Para-2.5) 
Action Taken 
The recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee have been noted for 
compliance. 
Saksham Anganwadi 
Observation/recommendation 
2.  The Committee also recommends that computerized data relating to learning outcomes 
and health parameters of all the children registered in “Saksham Anganwadis” be  maintained for 
early identification so that timely remedial measures for children requiring special attention are 
taken. This data should be uploaded on the website of the Ministry and regularly updated.  
(Para-3.4) 
Action Taken 
It has been proposed to upgrade 2.00 lakh AWCs @ 40000 AWCs per annum to Saksham 
Anganwadi Centres by providing/adding more services with  better infrastructure  to deliver 

3 
 
improved quality of services in health, nutrition and Early Childhood Care and Education 
(ECCE). 
 
To track the data on health and Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE), templates 
would be integrated including that for children requiring special attention, with POSHAN 
Tracker so that data on real time basis is available to the District and State authorities an d 
remedial measures can be taken by them.  
Suposhit Bharat 
Observation/recommendation 
3. The Committee recommends that, in view of the increased cases of stunting, underweight 
and anemia among children and women in a number of States, POSHAN Abhiyaan shoul d be 
taken up on a war footing with active involvement and convergent action by different Ministries 
like Women and Child Development, Rural Development, Jal  Shakti and Health and Family 
Welfare to ensure concrete action on the ground, by identifying the maximum malnourished 
districts of the country and establishing a 'Malnutrition Eradication Authority', latest by 30th 
June, 2021. 
(Para-3.11) 
Action Taken 
The Pillars of Common Core under Poshan 2.0 includes Governance, Convergence, 
Capacity Building and I T Component. Through Convergence, Poshan 2.0 aims addressing 
Nutrition Indicators through a holistic approach   engaging  all  relevant  Ministries  and 
Departments that aims at - Ministry and scheme level convergence,   District and State level 
monitoring c onvergence, Community participation and ownership through Poshan Panchayats, 
VHSNCs, Mother Groups etc., and Rewards & recognitions, and incentives for functionaries & 
volunteers. 
Nutrition support for children and pregnant women and lactating mothers is under the remit 
of MoWCD. Therefore, there is  no significant  overlap with  other schemes/sub-
schemes of other Ministries/Departments. However, as regards need for convergence to 
consolidate outcomes is concerned, ‘AYUSH for Anganwadis is planned to strengthen indigenous 
knowledge on nutrition and usage in Anganwadi  Centres with the help of Ministry of AYUSH. 

4 
 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare will help in creation of model POSHAN Vatikas and 
provision of bio-fortified seeds. Ministry of Environment and Forests will extend their schemes of 
Social Forestry and CAMPA for generating food -forests. Ministry of Jal Shakti will help to 
improve Drinking Water and Sanitation facilities in the Anganwadi  Centres and in harvesting 
rainwater. With the help  of Ministry of Rural Development, M/o PRIs, POSHAN Vatikas will be 
established as viable units. DoFPD is undertaking a programme for fortification of rice to meet 
micro-nutrient requirements. MoWCD will participate in the programme for  supply of fortified  
rice under Poshan 2.0 to beneficiaries.  
MoWCD has already issued joint guidelines with other relevant Ministries / Departments 
to deal with the issue of malnutrition in a holistic way. 
In the joint letter issued dated 31 st August, 2020 , Secretaries of MoPR, MoRD and 
MoWCD have recommended developing Kitchen/Nutri-gardens in Anganwadi premises  and on 
Panchayat / Community land in the village.  
In the joint letter issued dated 7 th September,  2020  by  the Secretaries of MoHFW, 
MoAYUSH, MoPR and MoWCD, early identification and management of SAM children has 
been e mphasized. Utilizing indigenous systems of Ayurveda, Sidha and Unani and 
strengthening community support, through Poshan Panchayat has been recommended.  
The issue of SAM and Poshan Panch ayat have been emphasized vide 
joint letters issued to States by Hon’ble Ministers of MoWCD and MoH&FW.   
In the joint letter dated 2 nd September, 2020 by Secretaries of School Education an d 
Literacy and MoWCD, States have been requested to organize POSHAN Assembly, essay 
completions and e-Quiz in all schools.  
In its streamlined guidelines vide letter dated 13th January, 2021, MWCD had emphasised 
that one of the major activities under the P OSHAN Abhiyaan is to leverage technology for 
monitoring and improved ser vice delivery for beneficiaries including Pregnant Women, 
Lactating Mothers and Children (0 -6 years). For this, a robust ICT enabled platform ‘Poshan 
Tracker’ has been developed to ens ure real time monitoring of provisioning supplementary 
nutrition for improving nutritional status of beneficiaries and providing real time information for 
prompt supervisions and management of services. All States/UTs were requested to advise all 
AWWs to d own load the new Poshan Tracker App.  States/UTs were advised to 
introduce transparent processes for procurement of phones as per GFR and vigilance guideli nes 
and ensure its procurement within the ceiling using GeM platform.  

5 
 
The point regarding establishing a ‘Malnutrition Eradication Authority’ has been noted. 
Missing Children 
Observation/recommendation 
4. The Committee recommends that the Ministry along with National Commission for 
Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) and the State Commission for Protection of Child Rights 
(SCPCR) should evolve a mechanism to expedite the process so that the missing children reach 
home as soon as possible.  
(Para-3.22) 
Action Taken 
 Section 2 (14) (vii) of JJ Act,  2015 includes a “Missing Child”  as a ‘child in need of care 
of protection’. The Ministry has issued a ‘Standard Operating Procedure for cases of Missing 
Children’ on 23.11.2016, to assist Police, Child Welfare Committee, Juvenile Justice Board and 
other stakeholders in dealing with the cases of missing and found or recovered children 
 
To deliberate upon the issues of safety, development and wellbeing of children of the 
country, a Seminar was organised on 24.03.2021 under the chairpersonship of Hon’ble Min 
(WCD) with National and State Commissions for Protection of Child Rights. 
 
NCPCR would prepare a Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) for rescue and rei ntegration 
of missing children in consultation with SCPCRs. 
Vacancy position in the Ministry and organizations under its ambit  
Observations/Recommendations 
5. The Committee recommends that special recruitment drive may be conducted to fill up the 
large scale vacancies in the Ministry and various organisations under its administrative control 
latest by 30 th June, 2021 as the persis tent vacant positions create a wrong perception about our 
collective commitment to social justice. 
(Para-3.24) 
Action Taken 

6 
 
The workforce of the Ministry (Secretariat), comprising of various cadres in different 
categories, is appointed by DoPT, MoSPI, DEA and MHA (OL), details of which are as under: 
  
S/N Name of Posts Sancti
oned 
posts 
On-
roll 
posi
tion 
Vac
ancy 
Cadre Controlling Authority 
i. ACC 13 10 3 DoPT 
ii. IES 3 3 0 DEA 
iii. ISS 9 7 2 MoSPI 
iv. CSOL 8 7 1 D/o Official Language, MHA 
v. CSS 119 93 26 DoPT 
vi. CSSS 46 24 22 DoPT 
vii. CSCS 7 4 3 DoPT 
viii. SCD 4 2 2 MWCD 
ix. MTS & Dispatch rider 50 14 36 SSC &DoPT 
x. Ex-cadre posts 4 2 2 MWCD 
  DoPT 265 166 99   
  
It is mentioned that DoPT has been requested to fill up the vacant posts in Group ‘A’ and 
‘B’ from time to time. Further, a reservation roster for filling up MTS posts in the Ministry was 
prepared and sent to DoPT for vetting. On its receipt, the matter wi ll be taken up with SSC and 
DoPT for filling up these posts. Regarding SCD, no suitable candidate is available for filling up 
of vacant posts. However, efforts are being made for filling up these posts on deputation basis as 
per existing RR.  
 
POSHAN Abhiyaan 
 
Advertisement for t wo posts of Executive Director  and seven posts  of Project Manager 
has been published. The contractual posts of Consultant, Project Associate, Data Entry Operator 
and MTS has been extended up to 30.9.2021. 
NCW 
The Commission has been regularly advertising the sanctioned vacant posts in the 
Employment News. The  latest advertisement has appeared in the Employment News of 3rd 
April, 2021 edition and last date of receipt of applications was 02.05.2021.    The selection 
process is in pipeline.  Efforts shall be made to finalize the process before 30 th June, 2021.  It is 
pertinent to mention here that in its Study carried out by the Staff Inspection Unit of Department 
of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, the mode of filling up the sanctio ned posts has been given 
as transfer by deputation on Foreign Service  terms basis.   The office of the National 

7 
 
Commission for Women is located away from the Central place in Delhi in Jasola, hence there 
is very poor response to the advertisement given by t he Commission from time to time and the 
post(s) remain vacant.  
 
NCPCR 
NCPCR has initiated the process of filling -up the vacant positions.  The post of Hindi 
Translator (on deputation basis/foreign service terms) has been filled and selected candidate is 
expected to join by 26.05.2021. 
The other vacant positions to be fil led on deputation basis/foreign service terms have 
been circulated to all Ministries/Departments of Government of India on 19.04.2021 and last date 
of receipt of application is 08.06.2021. 
RMK 
 
There is no proposal to fill the vacancies of Rashtriya  Mahila Kosh as the proposal for 
dissolution of Rashtriya Mahila Kosh is under consideration.  
  
CARA 
At present there are only 16 positions vacant in CARA. The office will carry out a special 
recruitment drive to fill-up the vacant positions 
  
CSWB 
As per the recommendations of the Ministry of Finance (DoE), Hon'ble Minister, WCD 
has given in-principle approval for closure of CSWB which has been conveyed to Chairperson, 
CSWB, vide letter dt. 18.06.2021. Therefore, the need for special recruitment drive to fill up 
vacancies in CSWB does not arise.  
  
 
NIPCCD 
 
Institute has requested to the Ministry for the permission to fill up the vacancies as per 
rules. 
 
FNB 
  

8 
 
It is to state that all the operations of the Food and Nutrition Board have been closed and 
notification to this effect has also been published in the weekly Gazette Notification of India 
(26th June- 2nd July 2021). 
 
Prevention of Sexual Harassment in Corporate World 
Observations/Recommendations 
6. The Committee recommends that sexual harassment cases in corporate world should find 
a mention in the Annual Report of National Commission for Women (NCW). Further, gender 
sensitisation of male counterparts should be conducted and media protocol regarding depiction of 
women should also be framed. 
(Para-3.25) 
Action Taken 
As per Section 22 of the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, 
Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 (the SH Act) authorises every employers to  include in its 
annual report the number of cases filed and disposed off and if no such annual report is required 
to be prepared then intimate such number of cases to the District Officer, who shall forward a 
brief report on the annual report submitted to the State Government. 
With regard to gender sensitisation of male counterpart, section 19 of the SH Act obligates 
all employers to organise workshops and awareness programmes at regular intervals for 
sensitising the employees including male employees about the provisions of the Act. 
The Programme and Advertising Code prescribed under the Cable Television Network 
Rules, 1994 (Rule 6 and 7), Code for Self Regulation in Advertising of the Advertising Standards 
Council of India (Chapter II), Content Certificati on Code by Broadcasting Content Complaints 
Council (Theme 2 - Sex, Obscenity and Nudity) and Self -Regulation Guidelines by News 
Broadcasters Association (NBA) already provides for the decent depiction of women in media. 
 
 
NCW 
  
NCW shall comply with the observation of Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee.  

9 
 
Issue of pornography on social media and its effect on children 
Observations/Recommendations 
7. The Committee recommends the Ministry along with National Commission for Protection 
of Child Rights (NCPCR) should take measures to curb sexual exploitation of children and 
circulation of child pornographic content on social media.  
(Para-3.29) 
Action Taken 
The steps taken by NCPCR with regard to circulation of child pornographic content on 
social media are enclosed as Annexure I. 
Simplifying the procedure of adoption under Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of 
Children) Act, 2015. 
Observations/Recommendations 
8. The Committee recommends that, with a view to reduce the delay due to procedural 
complexities, the methodology involved in the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) 
Act, 2015, should be simplified and made more humane for making the adoption process smooth. 
(Para-3.31) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has introduced the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) 
Amendment Bill, 2021 to strengthen child protection in the District by empowering District 
Magistrate to coordinate and monitor functions of various stakeholders and to issue orders of 
adoption. Among other things, the amendment would help in addressing the delays in finalisation 
of adoption process. The Bill was passed by Lok Sabha on 24.03.2021. 
Closure of Food and Nutrition Board (FNB), Central Social Welfare Board (CSWB) and 
Rashtriya Mahila Kosh (RMK) 
Observations/Recommendations 

10 
 
9. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should conduct an impact assessment of 
thethree bodies - Rashtriya Mahila Kosh (RMK), Central Social Welfare Board (CSWB) and Food 
and Nutrition Board (FNB) and devise a mechanism to see that manpower of these bodies are not 
impacted by their closure and integrate them into the Ministry or other bodies/organizations. 
(Para-3.32) 
Action Taken 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for guidance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
Saksham Anganwadi 
Observations/Recommendations 
1. The Committee recommends that t he Ministry should chalk    out a blue print in 
coordination with the Ministry of Education to modernize Anganwadi s and strengthen them as 
early-childhood education institutions    in      line   with the over -arching goal of ensu ring 
universal access to high-quality Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE) as envisaged in the 
National Education Policy (NEP), 2020, latest by 30th   June, 2021.   Suitable training to 
Anganwadi workers/ teachers for t his increased responsibility needs to be imparted in a time 
bound manner. 
 (Para-3.1) 
Action Taken 
It is proposed to roll out ECCE in all the AWCs in a phased manner beginning FY 2021-22 
and cover up to 20% of the AWCs in each FY for next five years. 
 
Ministry of WCD has already developed year wise Activity book for the children of age 
group of 3-4 years, 4-5 years & 5-6 years 
Further, in convergence with Department of School Education, the curriculum of children 
of age group of 3 -6 years will be finali sed and for this purpose NCERT will be in touch with 
MWCD and NIPCCD.  
Anganwadi workers will be further trained for quality education to chi ldren of the age 
group of 3 -6 years. Anganwadi workers with qualifications of 10 th will be given 1 year online 
training and that with +2 will be given 6 months online training. 
Observation/recommendation 
2. The Committee recommends that the amount of honorarium given to Anganwadi Workers 
(AWWs) and Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs) may be consid ered for enhancement to provide better 
service conditions to them.  

12 
 
(Para-3.5) 
Action Taken 
Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) &Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs),  being honorary workers, 
are paid a monthly honoraria as decided by the Government from time to time. In addition to the 
honoraria paid by the Go vernment of India, most of the  States/UTs are also giving monetary 
incentives to these workers out of their own resources. 
Suposhit Bharat 
Observations/Recommendations 
3. The Committee recommends that the  Ministry should take the following actions in respect 
of POSHAN Abhiyaan:- 
i. Key Performance Indicators should be constantly monitored and uploaded on the 
website. 
ii. National Nutrition Park   (NNP) on   the lines of   the one created   near the Statue  of 
Unity, Kevadia, Gujar at, be created across different States of the country with the 
involvement of Anganwadi Workers. 
iii. generate awareness about the uses  of  Ayurvedic  plants  for  health  and nutrition. 
 (Para-3.9) 
Action Taken 
(i) A detailed technological platform, namely "Poshan Tracker", has been deve loped by 
National e -Governance Division (NeGD) of MeitY,  which will track all beneficiaries along 
defined indicators.  
This ICT enabled management   application  will  provide  a 360 -degree  view of the 
activities of the Anganwadi Centre (AWC), service deliveries of Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) 
and complete beneficiary management for pregnant women, lactating mothers and children. It 
will enable real -time monitoring and tracking of all A WCs, AWWs and  beneficiaries 
on the defined indicators. 

13 
 
For Take Home Rations (THR), QR Code based check will be introduced while 
distributing packets and maintaining inventory. The ICDS data ma nagement application will 
have data analytics built to ensure a system of dy namic triggers and alters to all stakeholders in 
the system. 
Outcomes in respect of improvement in malnutrition levels will be dynamically tracked 
by the IT platform, Poshan Tracker, in every quarter. Outcomes will feed into the National 
Nutrition Index. 
(ii)  Exposure visit for learn ing of other States/UTs to the pilot National Nutrition Park 
(NNP) created at Kevadia, Gujarat would be planned. Thereafter, States/UTs may initiate 
creation of similar parks from innovation funds @  27.85 lakhs per district fo r entire project 
duration. 
(iii)  MoWCD and MoAYUSH have signed a MoU on 20 th September, 2020 to work together 
on the objective of creating a joint fr amework for providing holistic  nutrition care for 
women and children.  In addition to providing technical  guidance and conducting yoga 
programmes at Anganwadi  Centres, Mo AYUSH will also provide 'nutritional counselling' at 
Anganwadi Centres. 
With regard to generating awareness about the uses of Ayurveda plants for health and 
nutrition, Plantations Drive under 3rd Poshan Pakhwada in March , 2021 has been emphasized 
upon. Through the AYUSH supported plantation drives, there have been planted 1.1 0 lakh 
saplings of medicinal plants during  Poshan Pakhwada 2021. Similarly, in terms of setting up of 
Kitchen Gardens, 2,58,624 plantation activities   held through which 10,92,968 new kitchen 
gardens developed during the Poshan Pakhwada 2021. 
Observation/recommendation  
4. The Committee also recommends that to ensure effective implementation of the new 
POSHAN tracker appli cation, the Ministry should maintain a State -wise progress of the 
implementation status so that identification of those deprived of the benefits can be made on real 
time basis for timely remedial measures. 
(Para-3.14) 
Action Taken 

14 
 
In its streamlined guidelines vide letter dated   13th January,  2021,  MWCD had 
emphasized that one of the major activities   under  the  POSHAN Abhiyaan is to leverage 
technology for monitoring and improved service delivery for beneficiaries including Pregnant 
Women,  Lactating  Mother‘s  and Children (0-6 years). For this, a robust ICT enabled platform, 
‘Poshan Tracker’     has    been    developed    to    ensure    real time     monitoring    of 
provisioning  supplementary nutrition   for  improving  nutritional  status of be neficiaries and 
providing real truce information for prompt supervisions and management of services. All 
States/UTs were requested to advise all AWWs to download the new Poshan Tracker App. 
States/UTs were advised   to  introduce  transparent  processes  for procurement  of phones as per 
GFR and   vigilance  guidelines  and ensure   its procurement   within the   ceiling using GeM 
platform.  
Alternatively, through the Poshan Tracker, the system will generate automated alerts to the 
critical last -mile beneficiaries, and will also ensure efficient audit of the delivery system, by 
documenting real time attendance of beneficiaries, duty bearers and actual receipt of 
Supplementary Nutrition. Such a robust digital technology platform and management in formation 
system will help the  mission to scale efficiently, thereby generating  and documenting significant 
positive impact. Hence, all the States/ UTs shall implement POSHAN Tracker.  
Poshan Tracker has already been implemented in 27 States and 6 Union Territories. 
Legislation for curbing trafficking of women and children 
Observation/recommendation  
5. The Committee recommends that in  view of the spurt in crimes like foeticide, infanticide, 
child marriage and trafficking, the Ministry should work on a war footing in collaboration with 
the Home Ministry and State Governments to bring down the crimes against women and children 
and evolve proper rehabilitation, redressal and re-integration mechanisms, during Financial Year 
2021-22. 
(Para-3.19) 
Action Taken 
'Police' and 'Public Order' are State subjects under the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution 
of India and therefore, it is the primary  duty of the State Governments to prevent, detect, register 
and take action on complaints related to gender-based bias, discrimination and violence against 

15 
 
women and children and penalize the perpetrators responsible for such inequality, discrimination, 
bias and violence against women and children . This Ministry supplements State Government’s 
efforts through various Schemes such as Beti  Bachao Beti Padhao, One Stop Centre, Women 
Helpline and Mahila Police Volunteer etc. introduced to address such discrimina tion and violence. 
In addition, this Ministry from time to time sends communications to all the States/UTs to ensure 
the effective implementation of all these women centric Acts. 
Safety of women 
Observation/recommendation  
6. The Committee recommends that in view of the increase in cases of violence against 
women across the country, Ministry should make concerted efforts to evolve a mechanism through 
coordination with various field agencies to minimize the response time to distress calls from 
women, so that violence against women can be prevented and an action plan be submitted, latest 
by 30th June, 2021. 
(Para-3.20) 
Action Taken 
'Police' and 'Public Order' are State subjects under the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution 
of India and therefore, it is the primary duty of the State Governments to prevent, detect, register 
and take action on complaints related to gender-based bias, discrimination and violence against 
women and children and penalize the perpetrators responsible for such inequality, discrimination, 
bias and violence against women and children . This Ministry supplements State Government’s 
efforts through various Schemes  such as Beti  Bachao Beti Padhao, One Stop Centre, Women 
Helpline, Mahila Police Volunteers etc. introduced to address such discrimination and violence. In 
addition, this Ministry from time to time sends communications to all the States/UTs to ensure the 
effective implementation of all these women centric Acts. 
Further, there are various schemes/ projects being implemented under Nirbhaya Fund like 
'setting up FTSCs, strengthening State's Forensic science Laboratories,   setting up Women Help 
Desk at all Poli ce Stations, setting up Anti Human Trafficking Units at district level and 
customization of AIS 140 vehicle platform device in State/UT's Public Transport for tracking etc. 
Observation/recommendation  

16 
 
7. The Committee recommends that, though Mahila Police Volunteers (MPVs) have been 
approved for 13 States, out of which it has been operational in only 5 States with a total of 9531 
MPVs selected so far, MPVs should be  deployed in the remaining 8 States, particularly in rural 
and semi-urban areas, so as to curb crimes against women and to supplement the existing law 
enforcement agencies. 
(Para-3.21) 
Action Taken 
The scheme did not receive encouraging response from the State Governments. Therefore, 
based on the learning experience and evaluation of the scheme , the Ministry has decided to 
discontinue this scheme. 
The Ministry has decided to implement the Umbrella Scheme for Safety, Security and 
Empowerment of Women under the name ‘Mission Shakti’ including for improving the condition 
of women affected by violen ce in the country.  The existing schemes of MWCD will be subsumed 
in Mission Shakti’ to address the issues of women on a life-cycle continuum basis for making them 
equal partners in nation -building through convergence at different levels of governance, grea ter 
participation and support of Panchayats and local governance bodies and Jan Sahabhagita. 
 
Implementation of laws relating to child marriage and child labour 
 
Observation/recommendation  
8. The Committee recommends that in view of the increase in incidents of child marriage and 
child labour during the lockdown period as reported in different States, the laws relating to child 
marriage and child labour should be enforced strictly.  
(Para-3.23) 
Action Taken 
The Parliament has enacted the ‘Prohibition of Child Marriage Act (PCMA), 2006’ to 
prevent the social evil of child marriage. The Government also undertakes awareness drives, media 
campaigns and outreach programmes and issues advisories to the States/ UTs from time to time to 
highlight evil effects of this practice. Further, the Ministry of Women and Child Development 

17 
 
implements the schemes of ‘Beti  Bachao Beti Padhao (BBBP)’ in which creation of awareness 
amongst women on matters pertaining to gender equal ity and discouraging of child marriage is an 
important focus area.  
Child labour is a child in need of care and Protection under the provi sions of the Juvenile 
Justice (Care and Protection of Children ) Act, 2015. These children merit support from statutory  
service delivery structures along with Institutional and non Institutional care under the Act. The 
Ministry has been emphasizing upon the States and UTs to ensure rehabilitation of children 
adversely impacted by COVID 19 as per the provisions of the JJ Act, 2015. 
The National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) is also mandated to 
monitor the implementation of the JJ Act, 2015. 
Rescue and Rehabilitation of Children 
Observation/recommendation  
9. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Women and Child Development along 
with Ministry of Education and Ministry of Skill Development should formulate skill development 
initiatives and vocational training programmes for rehabilitation of children rescued from 
begging, drug abuse, child labour and adolescent dropout girls. 
(Para-3.26) 
Action Taken 
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act 2015 lays down detailed 
instructions for the standards of care in Child Care Institutions (CCIs). The various rehabilitation 
and reintegration services to be provided in the CCIs, also include appropriate education, including 
supplementary education, special education, appropriate education for children with special needs; 
skill development; occupational therapy and life skill education. 
 The Min istry has formulated a new Mission VATSALYA, an initiative for ensuring 
comprehensive child welfare including child protection. Mission Vatsalya envisages to develop 
protocols for skilling interventions, drug de -addiction, and special interventions for Div yang, in 
consultation with the concerned Ministries/ Departments. 
NIPCCD to take consultancy and impact assessment study 

18 
 
Observation/recommendation  
10. The Committee recommends the National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child 
Development (NIPCCD) should create a platform for sharing their research with different 
Universities having gender/women studies and also use the research findings for the bene fit of the 
general public. NIPCCD should also re-structure itself to provide consultation services and make 
impact assessment study of various schemes, programmes relating to women and children.  
(Para-3.27) 
Action Taken 
NIPCCD shares its Research Studies Reports with the software of Developing Library 
Network (DELNET), which have more than 250 Institutional Members in Delhi and more than 
7000 Institutional member all over India. Further, suggestion  of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports has been noted by the Institute for 
compliance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Observation/recommendation 
1. The Committee recommends that in view of the gross under utilisation of funds under 
important schemes like POSHAN Abhiyaan, Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana, Beti Bachao 
Beti Padhao etc ., the benefits often do not reach the beneficiaries, and therefore, the  Ministry 
should utilise the funds allocated under various Heads to the fullest extent and strive to achieve 
results at the grass -root level. The outlook of the Ministry needs to change from outlays to 
outcomes and Ministry should be able to spend, execute  and give measurable outcome driven 
results, in the upcoming Financial Year. 
(Para-2.10) 
Action Taken 
 The response on POSHAN Abhiyaan has reference to and is in continuation of updates 
provided by MoWCD against observation para 4.7 of the 321st Report on the recommendation 
observations  contained  in 314th Report of the Department. 
 (in Cr.) 
Year 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
BE 1,500 3,000 3,400 3,700 
RE 950 3,000 3,400 600 
Expenditure  879.48 2590.67 1879.23 408.14 
  
Against the fund released to the States and  UTs, IUFR has been received for the sum of 
₹26l9.80 Crores till 3 Ist January, 2021. Moreover, States    and UTs are regularly asked in the 
meetings and through letters to push fund utilization. 
Concerning expenditure on ICT -RTM, as on 31.3.2021 a total of ₹1053.44 Crore was 
spent out of which ₹600.29 Crore (56.98%) was spent on procurement of smartphones, followed 
by ₹203.96 Crore (19.36%) on smartphone recharge and maintenance. ₹68.50 Crore (6.50%) on 
training and ₹180.68 Crore (17.3%) on incentive to AWWs and AWHs for using smartphones. 

20 
 
Issues in procurement of Smart Phones and Growth Monitoring Devices (GMDs) from the 
GeM Portal was the major reason for low utilization as most States/UTs reported to have tender 
problems/issues. 
Less procurement of Smart Phones and GMDs has simultaneously affec ted various other 
activities like Smart Phone recharge and maintenance, technological capacity building training 
and providing incentives to AWWs and AWHs for data coverage, thereby, further lowering the 
fund utilisation. 
Additionally, Covid-19 outbreak ha s also put an effect on the flow of expendi ture due to 
less field related  activities  during  the  pandemic.  This has further reduced the expenditure 
under POSHAN Abhiyaan. 
 In order to efficiently utilize the funds allocated under various heads to the fu llest 
extent by achieving results upto the grass -root level, MoWCD has designed ‘SAKSHAM 
ANGANWADI and POSHAN 2.0' for 2021-22 to 2025-26 (five years) with the ‘outcome based 
monitoring framework with respective indicators for the year 2021 -22 is also indicated in the 
Scheme’s EFC. 
Comments of the Committee 
 It has been observed that the Ministry has stated the reasons for gross 
underutilization of funds for the scheme of POSHAN Abhiyaan only, while the reasons for 
under-utilisation of funds for other s chemes like Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana, 
Beti Bachao Beti Padhao etc. have been left out. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should look into this matter seriously and to exercise financial prudence and use 
the allocated funds optimally and  judiciously and also provide the State-wise list for under 
utilization of funds along with the reasons, for other schemes like Pradhan Mantri Matru 
Vandana Yojan a, Beti Bachao Beti Padhao etc.  Unless the utilisation of funds on its key 
schemes goes up, the allocation has little meaning. 
Saksham Anganwadi 
Observation/recommendation 
2. The Committee recommends that the  Ministry should make concerted efforts to provide 
well-constructed, well - ventilated buildings with piped potable water supply  for drinking 

21 
 
and cooking purposes and tap water in toilets to all Anganwadi Centers and devise a mechanism 
to constantly monitor and conduct inspection of Anganwadi Centers to curtail administrative and 
financial mismanagement at the grass root level during Financial Year 2021-22.  
(Para-3.3) 
Action Taken 
The need for providing potable drinking water in all Anganwadi  Centres has been 
repeatedly emphasized by the Govt. States/UTs were urged to leverage the Jal Shakti Mission 
under the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation to provide safe and clean piped water for 
cooking, drinking, washing and for toilets during a Review meeting recently conducted by 
Hon'ble Minister (WCD) with States/UTs during 15.12.2020 to 05.01.2021. 
Emphasizing the importance of safe and ade quate potable  drinking water as an absolute 
necessity, Chief Secretaries of All State Governments and UT Administrations have been 
further requested, vide this Ministry's D.O. letter dated 12.01.2021 to take appropriate measures 
and extend   all possible a ssistance to ensure that the piped water reaches every Anganwadi 
Centre. 
Further, in order to stress importance of conservation, protection and sustainable use of 
water among citizens from very beginning to meet current and future human need of water, 
States/UTs have been requested, vide this Ministry's   D.O. letter dated  18.03.2021, to 
take  up  roof- top rain -water harvesting by developing Rain Water Harvesting Structures 
(RWHS) suitable to climatic conditions in the premises of all Anganwa dis so that the se are 
ready to ‘ Catch The Rain', when the monsoon arrives and  to ensure rooftop RWHS on all 
‘pucca' AWCs/buildings before monsoon and generate awareness and give technical guidance 
on RWHS. DM/District Collectors who are the Nodal Duty Holders may act as facilitators in 
convergence with Jal Jeevan Mission. Anganwadi Workers/Anganwadi Helpers would be 
actively engaged in dissemination of knowledge about conservation, hygienic and judicious use 
of water generally as well to propagate the importance of taking -up rain water harvesting while 
they interact with the beneficiaries. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Ministry has not mentioned about the steps taken by the Ministry to monitor and 
inspect AWCs to curtail administrative and financial mismanagement at the grass root level. 

22 
 
The Committee is of the view that AWC is the focal point for delivery of ICDS servi ces and 
AWCs require proper infrastructure in order to discharge their functions effectively. Hence, 
the Committee recommends that the Ministry should en sure that  proper infrastructure is 
available at all AWCs and to apprise the Committee of the efforts ta ken up by the Ministry 
in this regard and also the steps taken to monitor and inspect AWCs at the grass root level. 
Suposhit Bharat 
Observation/recommendation 
3. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should set up a vigilant monitoring 
mechanism to ensure that food packets for pregnant women and lactating mothers as well as 
targeted meals for highly undernourished children reach the intended beneficiaries at the ground 
level. Active involvement of Anganwadi workers need to be ensured for successful i mplementation 
of the scheme. 
(Para-3.13) 
Action Taken 
This Ministry, vide letter dated 13.01.2021 have issued Streamlining Guidelines on Quality 
Assurance Roles and Responsibilities of Duty Holders, procedure for procurement, Integrating 
AYUSH concepts and Data Management and Monitoring     through   ‘Poshan Tracker’ 
for  transparency efficiency and accountability in delivery of Supplementary Nutrition. 
The States/UTs have been directed to introduce transparent process for procurement as per 
GFR and Vigilance guidelines and ensure that THR procured conforms to technical and nutritional 
standards set by MoWCD. The States/UTs are also requested to carry out Special Internal Audit of 
the SNP portfolio at the earliest. 
Comments of the Committee 
Malnutrition is a chronic problem and a longstanding challenge  of the country. The 
Ministry has not given any information as to whether a monitoring mechanism is being put 
in place to oversee the distribution system of food packets. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should put in place a monitoring mechanism to address the g aps and 
inefficiencies in the present distribution system to ensure that the food packets reach the 
intended beneficiaries. The Committee also recommended the food packets so delivered 

23 
 
should meet the nutritional/quality standards. There should be involvem ent of panchayats 
and other community groups to ensure that the scheme is being imple mented effectively at 
the grassroot level. 
Legislation for curbing trafficking of women and children 
Observation/recommendation 
4. The Committee recommends that in view of  the increase in incidents of trafficking of 
women and children in number of States, the Trafficking of Persons (Prevention, Protection and 
Rehabilitation) Bill, may be introduced in the next session of Parliament.          (Para-3.17) 
Action Taken 
Ministry is taking follow up action to bring the Bill in the Monsoon session of Parliament. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee observes that the said Bill has not been introduced in the parliament 
so far. The Committee reiterates that the Trafficking  of Persons (Prevention, Protection and 
Rehabilitation)Bill be introduced in Parliament at the earliest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-Nil-. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

25 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE (CHAPTER-III) 
 
It has been observed that the Ministry has stated the reasons for gross 
underutilization of funds for the scheme of POSHAN Abhiyaan only, while the reasons for 
under-utilisation of funds for other schemes like Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana, 
Beti Bach ao Beti Padhao etc. have been left out. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should look into this matter seriously and to exercise financial prudence and use 
the allocated funds optimally and judiciously  and also provide the State -wise list for unde r 
utilization of funds along with the reasons, for  other schemes like Pradhan Mantri Matru 
Vandana Yojan a, Beti Bachao Beti Padhao etc. Unless the utilisation of funds on its key 
schemes goes up, the allocation has little meaning.             (Para 1) 
 
The Ministry has not mentioned about the steps taken by the Ministry to monitor and 
inspect AWCs to curtail administrative and financial mismanagement at the grass root level. 
The Committee is of the view that AWC is the focal point for delivery of ICDS servi ces and 
AWCs require proper infrastructure in order to discharge their functions effectively. Hence, 
the Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that proper infrastructure is 
available at all AWCs and to apprise the Committee of the efforts ta ken up by the Ministry 
in this regard and also the steps taken to monitor and inspect AWCs at the grass root level.  
                              (Para 2) 
Malnutrition is a chronic problem and a longstanding challenge  of the country. The 
Ministry has not given any information as to whether a monitoring mechanism is being put 
in place to oversee the distribution system of food packets. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should put in place a monitoring mechanism to address the gaps and 
inefficiencies in the present distribution system to ensure that the food packets reach the 
intended beneficiaries. The Committee also recommended the food packets so delivered 

26 
 
should meet the nutritional/quality standards. There sh ould be involvement of panchayats 
and other community groups to ensure that the scheme is being implemented effectively at 
the grassroot level.                 (Para 3) 
The Committee observes that the said Bill has not been introduced in the parliament 
so far. The Committee reiterates that the Trafficking of Persons (Prevention, Protection and 
Rehabilitation)Bill be introduced in Parliament at the earliest.             (Para 4) 
 
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, 
WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 2:00 P.M on 
Friday, the 26th November, 2021 in Committee Room- ‘4’, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building, A- Block, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman 
2.  Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
3. Ms. Sushmita Dev 
4. Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
5. Shri. K.C. Ramamurthy 
6. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
8. Shri Dhal Singh Bisen 
9. Shri Sadashiv Lokhande 
10.  Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
11. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
12. Shri Balak Nath 
13. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
14. Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma 
15. Shri Dharambir Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3.  Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
6. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
  
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He 
then informed them that the modifications as suggested by them in the draft Report on the 
subject “*     * *” in the previous meeting had been incorporated and revised draft had 
been circulated. He then informed that the agenda for the meeting was to deliberate upon the 
following three draft Reports of the Committee: 
* Pertains to other matter 

28 
 
(i) *       * * 
 
(ii) *    * * 
(iii) Action Taken Report (ATR) on 326th Report on Demands for Grants (2021-
22) of the Ministry of Women and Child Development. 
 
2.    * * *         
3.  The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
4. The Committee decided to present/lay the Report to both the Houses of Parliament during 
the upcoming Session of the Parliament. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Dr. Vinay 
P. Sahasrabuddhe, Chairman of the Committee and in his absence, Shri Bikash Ranjan 
Bhattacharyya, M.P. to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha. Shri Rajendra Agrawal, M.P. 
and in his absence, Shri Dharambir Singh, M.P. were authorized to lay the above mentioned 
Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
5.   The meeting adjourned at 2:52 P.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                       A.K. Mallick  
26th November, 2021                                                                                           Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 * Pertains to other matter 

29 
 
Annexure I 
(Para (3.29) 
  
INQUIRY ON SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS IN (Child Sexual Abuse Material) CSAM 
AND PORNOGRAPHIC MATERIAL AVAILABLE ONLINE TO CHILDREN 
  
I.  The Rajya Sabha ad-hoc Committee was constituted to look into the matter pertaining to 
“alarming issue of pornography on social media and its effect on children and society as a 
whole”. Since, in today’s world the availability and reach of children to pornographic material and 
the use of children in pornographic material is at rise. In view of the above scenario the ad-hoc 
Committee invited the Commission to make its submissions. 
  
In order of making submissions and to apprise the ad-hoc Committee, the Commission under 
section 13 (1) (j) and 14 of CPCR Act, 2005, conducted an inquiry into the spreading of porn 
sites on the internet/web and found indiscriminating evidences on the availability of such sites. 
Some of the findings that can be shared in a public document are given as under: 
a. The internet has three layers, namely the surface web, the deep web and the dark web. 
The dark web refers to encrypted online content that is not indexed by conventional 
search engines. It is a component of the deep web that describes the wider breadth of 
content that does not appear through regular internet browsing activities. To access 
dark web one need special browsers, search engines and also different networks. In 
regard to the above, total 31 sites were explored by NCPCR on dark web, of these, 5 
were pertaining to Indian Territory; 19 were of possibility of being Indian and rest 
were international sites. The contents of these sites are highly vulgar and repulsive in 
nature. It is therefore, established that all the Indian as well as international sites are 
easily available and accessible to cross sections of the society including children who 
are having unabated access to the internet. 
(Note: The Commission also reported these links of CSAM on Dark web to the Ministry of 
Home Affairs (MHA) on Cyber Crime Portal.)  
b. Commission under Section 13 (1) (a) of CPCR Act, examined and reviewed the 
existing safeguards and laws. On perusal of available legal provisions, a peculiar 
situation emerged that there is no safeguard for the person who happens to download 
any indiscriminating material which he is supposed to mandatorily report to the 
authorities under POCSO Act, 2012. Further, the IT Act doesn’t specify any authority 
to whom this report could be made. 
c. There is a provision of Mandatory reporting under Section 19 of POCSO Act, all the 
institutions, schools, parents, guardians, and organisation that are aware of any such 
objectionable use of their network; service provider should be made accountable for 
reporting to appropriate authority. Therefore, a mechanism could be introduced for 

30 
 
incorporating this provision in POCSO Rules to ensure that online exploitation of 
children be reported appropriately. 
d. It was observed that the children use internet/social media apps over various 
connections such as Wi-Fi, mobile internet service, etc., the connections of which are 
in the name of their parents. Hence, there is no data on how many children are having 
access of internet privately. 
e. There are numerous apps which were earlier available on the play store and now on 
sketchy websites along with other portals that distribute links to join social media 
platform and telegram groups soliciting child sexual abuse material. These links often 
lead to groups where either content is distributed free or at a premium that is paid 
using online payment services. Along with already created content, live streaming 
services of abuse of children and adults are also offered on these groups. There is a 
possibility that some of these apps may be hosted from within India. 
f. It has been further observed that the companies providing social media platforms such 
as Facebook, WhatsApp, Telegram, Twitter, Instagram etc. are reporting such 
incidents to NCMEC (National Centre for Missing and Exploited Children) which is a 
US based agency for reporting of cybercrime material. But Section 19 of POCSO Act, 
provides for mandatory reporting of such offences to the Indian authorities. Hence, 
there is a gap in reporting of such material/offences. 
g. Children are accessing social media platform such as Facebook, Instagram, Tweeter, 
Whats App, Telegram etc. and the pornographic material and the links to access such 
material are also available and circulated amongst the users on these platforms. 
Therefore, it was observed that children below 18 years have easy access to these 
materials without any check. 
Therefore, based on the findings and careful deliberation; Commission provided few suggestions 
to the ad-hoc Committee as under: 
1. Fixing Accountability: All the institutions, schools, parents, guardians, and 
organisations that are aware of any such objectionable use of their network, service 
provider should be made accountable for reporting to appropriate authority. Therefore, 
a mechanism should be introduced for incorporating this provision in POCSO Rules to 
ensure that online exploitation of children is reported on MHA portal 
“cybercrime.gov.in” or any other such portal created in future and awareness for 
reporting should be encouraged. 
2. Issuance of Sim Card in name of children: NCPCR further laid out a solution to keep 
check on the children and nature of content they have access through mobile phones 
and internet. The Commission suggested that the connections should be given in the 
name of children by way of proxy accountability such in the case of bank account of 
minor, or else when parents purchase connection in their name for children they 
should give a declaration that the connection will be used by the child, to ensure that 
the data can be maintained and children will not have access to such material. This can 

31 
 
also help in providing filters and restrictions by service providers. Also, a report may 
be generated on daily basis and forwarded automatically to the linked 
number/connection or email of the parent/guardian. Similarly, in cases where children 
use internet service of school at labs, libraries, etc. the service should be firstly 
password protected and individual usernames/login ids should be provided to the 
students and the report should be sent to the school authority concerned. 
3. Awareness regarding CSAM: The Commission expressed that Awareness need to be 
generated among general public in regard to Child Sexual Abuse Material (CSAM) 
and its reporting mechanism. 
4. Mandate on agencies running Social Media Platforms: The agencies providing social 
media platforms such as Facebook, WhatsApp, Telegram, etc. are reporting such 
incidents to NCMEC (National Centre for Missing and Exploited Children) which is 
an US based agency for reporting of cybercrime material. However, Section 19 of 
POCSO Act provides for mandatory reporting of such offences to the Indian 
authorities. Hence, they should be made mandatorily reporting it to the Indian agency. 
5. Protection to the Whistle-blowers: The Commission suggested that Child pornography 
is an offence under POCSO Act and Section 19 provides for mandatory reporting of 
the same. Further, Sec. 19 (7) under the Act provides for protection for reporting of 
POCSO cases in good faith. A reporting mechanism should be developed and 
strengthen in the said Act by making amendment in POCSO Rules. 
II.The Commission while conducting aforesaid inquiry came across of an article published in 
newspaper “The Hindu” dated 14th April, 2020, categorically mentioning the data of Pornhub, the 
world’s largest pornography website that ‘Traffic from India increased by 95% between March 24 
and 26, as compared to average traffic before the lockdown’. It also observed that Child Sexual 
Abuse Material (CSAM) is easily available to the users on payment of $ 2.99 (USD) on Apple 
iOS. The user just has to pay the amount and become the Pro user and all such material will be 
available to him over phone. 
         Similarly, such material was also found to be available on Twitter where many links to reach 
and obtain such kind of material were available through different Handles. These Twitter Handles 
also provided for links to WhatsApp groups through which this material can be obtained on 
WhatsApp Chats which is so called encrypted chats. Further, such material was found to be 
available on Google Play Store through the Apps provided by them for free. The child 
pornographic material can easily be accessed by anyone by downloading these apps. Thus, the 
following issues emerged - 
i. Availability of online Child Sexual Abuse Material (CSAM) and; 
ii. Pornographic Material accessible to children. 
Taking cognizance of the same, the Commission decided to inquire in the matter and U/s. 13 
(1) (j) and 14 of CPCR Act, 2005 issued notices to social media platforms such as Instagram, 
Twitter, WhatsApp, Google and Apple iOS on 23-24th April, 2020 to look into the matter and 
provide their policy/guidelines in such cases and the action taken by them in such cases. The 

32 
 
Commission also wrote to them to provide the information pertaining to number of complaints 
received by them on their platforms in regard to CSAM and Pornographic content. 
Understanding the seriousness of the issue the Commission organised various joint meetings and 
discussions with the social media platforms in order to formulate preventive methods and 
reporting mechanism to fill the lacunae and gaps in the laws and for the safety of children over 
internet. 
  
******** 
 
 
 