  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2021 / Agrahayana,1943, (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report No 
332 
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Three 
Hundred and Twenty Fifth Report on the Demands For 
Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on30th November, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30th November, 2021) 


Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2021 / Agrahayana, 1943, (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Three 
Hundred and Twenty Fifth Report on the Demands For 
Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on30th November, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha 30th November, 2021) 
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …...........................................................  (i) – (ii)  
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................   (iii) 
3.  ABBREVIATIONS.................................................................................................... (iv)- (v) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…............................  
Chapter-I  -   Observations/recommendations which have been accepted  
 by the Government ..............................................................  2-13 
Chapter -II  -  Observations/recommendations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies...........  14-25 
Chapter-III -  Observations/recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee... 26 
 Chapter-IV Observation/recommendations in respect of which replies of the    27 
Government is still awaited….. 
   
5. MINUTES.............................................................................................................................          28-29 
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th   September, 2021) 
 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri R. S. Bharathi  
3. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
4. * Ms. Sushmita Dev  
5. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad  
7. Shri K. C. Ramamurthy  
8. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
9. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
10. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Shri D. M Kathir Anand 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
16. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
17. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
18. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
19. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
20. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
21.  Shri Balak Nath 
22. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
23. Shri T. N. Prathapan 
24. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
25. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
26. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
27. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
28. Shri Dharambir Singh 
29. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
30. Shri S. Venkatesan 
31. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
---------------------------------- 
* Nominated w.e.f. 27.09.2021 
 
 
 
 
(i)

   
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
Shri A.K. Mallick, Director 
Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer (in-situ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee o n 
Education, Women, Children, Youth a nd Sports , having been authorised by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Thirty Second Report 
of the Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Three Hundred and Twenty Fifth Report on the Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of 
the Ministry  of Youth Affairs and Sports.  The Action Taken Replies from the Department of 
Youth Affairs were received on 28th June, 2021 and Action Taken Replies from the Department of 
Sports were received on 16th July and 26th August, 2021 respectively. 
2. Three Hundred and Twenty Fifth Report of the Department-Related Pa rliamentary 
Standing Committee o n Education, Women, Children, Youth a nd Sports was presented to Rajya 
Sabha on 16th March, 2021 and simultaneously laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16th March, 2021 
and Replies of the Government to the observations/recommendations contained in the Report were 
considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 26th November, 2021. 
3.  The Committee considered the d raft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 
26th November, 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                                    
26th November, 2021 
Agrahayana/ 1943 (Saka)                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on   Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
BE  Budget Estimates 
CSR  Corporate Social Responsibility 
CYP  Commonwealth Youth Programme 
DC  District Collector 
DFG  Demands for Grants 
DM  District Magistrate 
EFC  Expenditure Finance Committee 
FY  Financial Year 
GoI  Government of India 
 HRD  Human Resource Development 
 IC  International Cooperation 
 ILO  International Labour Organisation 
 IOA  Indian Olympic Association 
 KIC  Khelo India Centre 
 LNIPE  Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education 
 MoA  Memorandum of Agreement 
 MoF  Ministry of Finance 
 MoU  Memorandum of Understanding 
 MoYAS Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
 NABL  National Accreditation Board for Testing & Calibration Laboratories 
 NADA  National Anti-Doping Agency 
 NCOE  National Centre of Excellence 
 NCSC  National Centre for Sports Coaching 
 NCSSR National Centre of Sports Science and Research 
 NDS  National Discipline Scheme 
 NDTL  National Dope Testing Laboratory 
 NPDS  National Programme for Development of Sports 
 NPYAD National Programme for Youth and Adolescent Development  
(iv) 

 
 
 
NSDF  National Sports Development Fund 
NSDCI National Sports Development Code of India 
 NSF  National Sports Federation 
 NSNIS  Netaji Subhash National Institute for Sports 
 NSS  National Service Scheme 
 NSTC  National Sports Talent Contest 
 NSU  National Sports University 
 NYC   National Youth Corps 
 NYF  National Youth Festival 
 NYK  Nehru Yuva Kendra  
 NYKS  Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan 
 NYLP  National Young Leadership Programme 
 NYV  National Youth Volunteers  
 PAC  Project Appraisal Committee 
 PIB  Public Investment Board  
 PO  Programme Officer 
 RE  Revised Estimates 
 RGNIYD  Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development 
 RTI  Right to Information 
 RYSK  Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakram 
 SAI  Sports Authority of India 
 SFU  Self Financing Unit 
 SKIC  Small Khelo India Centre 
 STC  SAI Training Centre 
 TOPS  Target Olympic Podium Scheme 
 UNV  United Nations Volunteer 
 UNDP  United Nations Development Programme 
 WADA World Anti-Doping Agency 
 YH   Youth Hostel  
(v) 

    
 
1 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department-Related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee o n 
Education, Women, Children, Youth a nd Sports  deals with the Action T aken by the 
Department of Youth Affairs and Sports  on the Recommendations contained in its 3 25th   
Report on Demands For Grants 2021 -22 of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports which 
was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 16th March, 2021 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha 
on 16th March, 2021. 
2. The Action Taken Replies in respect of Recommendations contained in the above 
mentioned Report were received from the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports vide their 
communications dated 28 th June (Department of Youth Affairs ) and 16 th July, 2021  
(Department of Sports)  and 26 th August, 2021 (Department of Sports) .    These have been 
categorized as follows:- 
Chapter I :  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
  Paras -3.10, 3.13, 3.17, 3.24 3.32, 3.39, 3.54, 4.8, 4.9A, 4.17A, 4.17B, 4.18, 
4.19B, 4.20, 4.30, 4.42 
  TOTAL- 16 
Chapter II : Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of Government's replies: 
 
  Paras – 2.15, 3.11, 3.12, 3.14, 3.20,  3.22, 3.29, 3.45, 3.46, 3.51, 4.9B, 
4.19A, 4.47, 4.48 
  TOTAL- 14 
Chapter III : Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee. 
 
  Paras-  3.18 
  TOTAL- 1 
Chapter IV : Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited. 
 
  NIL 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER I 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee recommends that the Department of Sports should incentivize women 
participation in international sports events, such as the Olympics. Accordingly, the 
Department must set benchmarks for 50% female strength in all the National Centres of 
Excellence (NCOEs) and a new scheme for encouraging women sp ortspersons should be 
envisaged under the vertical ‘Sports for Women’ of the Khelo India Scheme. 
[Para 3.10] 
Action Taken 
1.1 As per the current sanctioned strength, percentage of woman athlete is approx. 52 % 
in NCOEs. However, Recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
Recommendation 
2. The Committee recommends that enhanced budgetary allocation may be sought at 
RE stage Khelo India scheme, so that sports infrastructural development and 
implementation of various programmes/activities are not adversely impacted. 
[Para 3.13] 
Action Taken 
2.1 Out of  ₹  657.51 crore allotted during the current FY 2021 -22, an  amount of            
₹ 277.50 crore only has been allotted for creation of capital assets under Khelo India Scheme 
at BE stage. It has been decided to release ₹ 150.00 crore against committed liabilities under 
Khelo India Scheme during current FY and seek additional funds of ₹ 200.00 crore in the 1st 
supplementary so that sports infrastructural development and implementation of various 
programmes/activities are not adversely impacted. 
2.2 The Ministry has also conveyed that the scheme of Khelo India has been extended 
for period u pto 2020-21 to 2025 -26 with overall financial outlay of Rs. 31.65 Crore which 

3 
 
includes allocation of Rs. 1879 crore for creation and upgradation of Sports Infrastructure.  
Department of Sports will approach the Finance Ministry based for further requiremen t in 
future. 
Recommendation 
3. The Committee recommends that the Department of Sports and SAI should adopt a 
more grass root -centric approach instead of the top -down approach for search and 
nurturing of natural sporting talents with inherent potential from  rural, tribal backward 
areas of the country and provide intensive training and financial support to improve medal 
prospects of the country in National and International sporting events. 
[Para 3.17] 
Action Taken 
3.1 Sports is a state Subject. Hence, it is responsibility of the state to develop sports at a 
grass root level under the vertical of Talent Identification and Development of Khelo India, 
which is being implemented by Sports Authority of India (SAI), athletes are selected from 
pan India covering tribal, rural and backward areas of the country in 21 sports disciplines. 
Under this vertical, a detailed mechanism for Grassroot Talent Identification has been put in 
place for identification of talent as mentioned below: 
 
 
3.1.1 Apart from the Talent Search  at Elite level, talent search has also been started at 
grass root level in two categories:- 
 Sports potential talent identification   
 Proven talent identification. 
 
3.1.2 Sports potential identification is done by assessment of fitness of school going 
children using Khelo India Fitness mobile application. The fitness parameters were 
identified by group of experts. These key parameters, which are required to become elite 
athlete (such as speed, endurance, flexibility, strength etc), are also included in above fitness 
parameters. Over 40,000 Physical Education/sports teachers from various schools of states 
have been trained so far as national Master and regional trainers. 

4 
 
3.1.3 Assessment of more than 22,00,000 students has already been done on mobile 
application from various schools across various states. The shortlisted students will be 
retested & sports specific talent/sports science tests will also be conducted. 
Identified potential sporting talent will be given option to join various sports straining centre 
across India. 
Sports proven talent identification will be done by:- 
 Grass root talent from potential area (mapping of each district with sporting talent). 
 Talent scouting at block, district, state & national competitions. 
 The talent identified by local scout to be screened at State level. 
 
3.1.4 Further, India is divided into 05 zones namely North, East, West, South and North -
East Zones to carry out talent identification. Grassroot Zonal Talent Identification 
Committees are formed to reach out to each and  every corner of the country to shortlist the 
proven athletes at the grassroot level. Talent Identification is to be carried out in 20 sport 
discipline of Khelo India in age group of 8 to 14 years, wherein the country has the potential 
/advantage to excel at the international level. 
 
3.1.5 For nurturing of identified talents, Khelo India Centres and Academies have been 
setup across the country. Under the ‘State Level Khelo India Centers’ vertical of the Khelo 
India Scheme, to strengthen the sports ecosystem  in the country at the grassroots level, 
1,000 KIC’s are proposed to be established over a period of 04 years across all districts of 
the country, out of which 217 KICs have already been notified. The grant to each Khelo 
India Centre (KIC) will be extended for remuneration of the past champion athlete as coach, 
support staff, purchase of equipment, sports kits, consumables, maintenance of playfields, 
sports kits and competition exposure. All such schools notified as Khelo India Centre are 
eligible to receive Rs. 5 lakhs per discipline as one -time grant and Rs. 5 lakhs per discipline 
as recurring grant.  
 
3.1.6 In addition, under the State level Khelo India Centres vertical of the Khelo India 
Scheme 01 centre in each State is being designated as Khelo India State Centre of 
Excellence and upgraded by providing support on the basis of viability gap analysis towards  
components such as equipments, sports science, coaches, etc. So far 24 KISCE have been 
notified in 23 States/UTs. Under Khelo India, 28 Army Boys Sports Companies are also 
funded.  

5 
 
 
3.1.7 Apart from above, under the National/Regional/State Academy vertical of Khelo 
India Scheme, 232 (156 Non SAI & 76 SAI) Academies have been accredited across the 
country which are receiving maximum support @ Rs. 6.28 lakhs per athlete per annum. 
 
3.1.8 SAI has also established 23 NCOEs and 67 STCs  to implement the a bove sports 
promotional schemes across the country.  49 Akharas are also being supported by SAI to 
promote sports at grass root level. 
Recommendation 
4. The Committee recommends that the Department of Sports should develop 
appropriate sports infrastructure  as well as train potential talent for promotion of winter 
games like snow skiing, ice skating (both figure and speed skating), ice hockey, snow rugby, 
snow baseball, etc. as well as water games like canoeing, kayaking and rafting in the Union 
Territories of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh and in other States having potential to develop 
such sports. 
 [Para 3.24] 
Action Taken 
4.1 The Department of Sports has approved setting up of a National Centre of 
Excellence for Winter Games at Gulmarg, Jammu & Kashmir, to pro mote Winter Sports in 
the region. For this, an amount of ₹ 50 lakh has been approved which will be utilised for 
hiring of a consultant for setting up the said centre. Land has been earmarked and will be 
allotted to J&K Sports Council / Youth Services and Sports Department, J&K after due 
formalities. In the meanwh ile, the National Centre of Excellence for Winter Games at 
Gulmarg, J&K has been inaugurated by the Hon’ble Union Minister for Youth Affairs and 
Sports, at temporary premises on 27.02.2021 pending allotment of land for the Centre by the 
UT Government at Gulmarg. 
 
4.2 This Ministry promotes winter games in the country und er the Khelo India Scheme 
since 2020. In addition to the previous submission, it is informed that this Ministry has 
conducted two editions of the Khelo India National Winter Games in 2020 and 2021 under 
the “Sports for Peace and Development” vertical of the Khelo India Scheme wherein various 
States/UTs and relevant organizations from all over the country participated. Further, Khelo 
India Winter Games have now been formally incorporated in the revised Khelo India 

6 
 
Scheme (2021-22 to 2025 -26) as annual competition to be held at the national  level. Two 
editions of winter games have also been conducted at UT level in Ladakh in 2020 and 2021. 
It is now an annual event organized under the aegis of Khelo India Scheme. 
 
4.3 Other than UT of Jammu & Kashmir, financial assistance has also been provi ded for 
promotion of Winter Games in the state of Uttarakhand and UT of Ladakh under the Khelo 
India Scheme for creation of winter sports infrastructure and purchase of winter games 
equipment (ice hockey and skiing). 
 
Recommendation 
5. The committee recommends that the Department may introduce international games 
scholarships in the potential medal winning sports in the future and formulate a new 
inclusive scheme for placing all medal winners (regular, para and special) in all sports 
disciplines on an equal footing thus ensuring employment for athletes and regular financial 
support/assistance. 
[Para 3.32] 
Action Taken 
 
5.1 Department of Sports has already revised/amended the scheme on 11.03.2020 to 
include more categories of the Para and Special category(deaf) for the cash award as 
compare to the previous scheme of 2018. Further, Department of Sports regularly revise 
(revised in 2015,2016,2017,2018,2020) the scheme to include more category since 2014. 
 
Recommendation 
 
6. The committee recommends that the Department should take necessary steps for 
identification of special and Paralympics athletes living in abject poverty with no sporting 
future and ensuring regular financial assistance and employment prospects. 
 
[Para 3.39] 
Action Taken 
 
6.1 Department of Sports has revised the scheme on 15.05.2020 to include more 
categories of the sportspersons and disciplines to provide financial assistance to the 

7 
 
sportspersons living in the indigent circumstance. The scheme has been circulated to all 
Federations, State Sports Departments, SAI, I OA, Sports Promotion Board, AIU and  also 
published on website etc. 
 
Recommendation 
 
 
7. The Committee accordingly recommends that a special recruitment drive should be 
undertaken to fill up large number of vacan cies of coaches and sports scientists in Sports 
Authority of India (SAI) and vacancies in Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical 
Education (LNIPE), Gwalior, latest by 30th June, 2021. 
 
[Para 3.54] 
Action Taken 
 
7.1 Steps taken  for filling up vacancies of coaches in SAI are as mentioned below : 
 
(i). Special recruitment drive was held to fill the existing vacancies of Olympians and 
Paralympians.  
 
(ii). Recruitment Rules are relaxed to extend the benefit of promotions to Coaches taking 
into account the total year of service instead of qualifying service. Accordingly, promotions 
are carried out as per the details given below: 
 
a)   100 Sr. Coaches promoted to Chief Coaches 
b)   180 Coaches promoted to Sr. Coaches 
 
(iii). 105 resultant vacancies are being f illed through deputation basis. Notice for the 
deputation is already issued and the process is in progress.  
 
(iv). Advertisement for Contract engagement has been initiated to fill 320 posts. 
 
(v). 244 sports science staffs are being engaged on contract basis.164Sports scientists have 
already joined. 
 
Supporting staff such as Masseur / Masseuse, Nursing Assistance and Lab Technician are 
being engaged by the respective Regional Centres locally. 
 
7.2 LNIPE had published advertisement No. E/121/02 dated 21.0 4.2020 and E/121/03 
dated 21.04.2020 to fill up the vacant post of academic and non academic staff in which the 
last date for inviting applications was fixed on 30.05.2020. In r esponse to these 
advertisements, applications have been received in the Institu te by this date, but the same 

8 
 
could not be processed due to COVID -19 pandemic. The process of recruitment is being 
taken up as soon as the situation of COVID-19 improves. 
 
 
Recommendation 
8. The Committee recommends that enhanced budgetary allocation may be sought at 
RE stage for NSS, so that implementation of various programmes/activities under the 
scheme is not adversely impacted. 
[Para 4.8] 
Action Taken 
8.1 NSS will make demand for additional allocation at RE stage for Financial year 2021-
22 keeping in  view the trend of expenditure and plan activities, so that the scheme does  not 
get adversely impacted. EFC proposal is also under submission seeking enhanced budget. 
 
Recommendation 
 
9. The Committee recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs should devise 
schemes and financial incentives in recognition of the work done by NSS volunteers and 
provide relevant incentives to increase the number of youth volun teers as well as intensify 
their efforts to implement NSS in more schools/colleges/Universities.  
 
 [Para 4.9] 
Action Taken 
9.1 There is provision for NSS Award for NSS Volunteer for their best community 
service with one certificate, one medal and ₹1 Lakh for 30 volunteers each year. 
 
9.2 Further the creation of additional 4062 NSS units (1 unit = 100 volunteer) has been 
incorporated in the EFC proposal of NSS to intensify the efforts of volunteer to implement 
NSS in more schools/ colleges/ universities. 
 
Recommendation 
 
 

9 
 
10. The Committee appreciated the remarkable work done by NYKS and its volunteers 
during the COVID pandemic to create awareness and sen sitise citizens and took strong 
exception to the low allocation of funds for such a large youth organisation like NYKS doing 
very beneficial ground level community work and recommends that additional funds may be 
requested at RE stage so that the existing as well as new programmes of NYKS are not 
adversely impacted. 
 
[Para 4.17A] 
Action Taken 
10.1 NYKS will make demand for additional allocation at RE stage for Financial year 
2021-22 keeping in  view trend of expenditure an d plan activities, so that the  scheme will 
not get adversely impacted. EFC proposal for enhanced budget is also under submission. 
 
Recommendation 
11. The Committee also expressed its concern on the heavy establishment expenditure of 
the organisation compared to the lower spending on core programmes/activities and 
recommends that the Department should make concerted efforts to cut the heavy 
establishment expenditure of NYKS and invest more on core programmes and conduct a 
performance evaluation or institutional audit to assess the quality of work, manpower 
resources and financial management in both organisations, during the FY 2021-22. 
[Para 4.17B] 
Action Taken 
11.1 NYKS has made budgetary provision of Rs.60.34 Crore towards implementation of 
Core Programmes under Annual Action Plan 2021 from Block Grant of Ministry of Youth 
Affairs and Sports. 
 
11.2 However, NYKS in collaboration with various Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies 
undertaking projects/programmes such as Youth as Frontline Workers during COVID -19 
Pandemic, Gandagi Mukt Bharat Abhiyan, Dissemination of Information on salient features 
of National Education Policy, Observance of Constitution Day, National Youth Volunteers, 
Observance of International Day of Yoga,  Observance of Rashtriya Poshan Maah,  
Education & Electoral Participation (SVEEP),  150th Birth Anniversary of Mahatma 
Gandhi, Swach htaPakhwada, Namami Gange Project, Ek Bharat Shrestha Bharat 

10 
 
Programme, Catch the Rain,  Swachh Bharat Abhiyan (with the support of Ministry of Jal 
Shakti), North East Youth Exchange Programme, Kashmiri Youth Exchange Programme 
and Tribal Youth Exchange Pro gramme (in collaboration with Ministry of Home Affairs), 
Financial Literacy (in collaboration with Ministry of Corporate Affairs), Awareness on 
Human Rights (National Human Rights Commission) etc.  
 
11.3 In addition to the above, NYKS Volunteers and Member s of Youth Clubs, COVID 
Warriors and Ganga Doots are undertaking various activities such as Blood Donation, 
Sapling Plantation, Awareness and Message dissemination towards COVID 19 pandemic, 
Promotion & facilitating villagers to get benefits under various schemes of Government, 
Activities on water conservation, Cleaning of water sources, Motivation resulting into 
construction of Toilets, Say No Use of Plastics, Dissemination on salient features of 
National Education Policy, 2020,  Activities on Know your co nstitution and fundamental 
duties,  Motivation of Girls and their parents to postpone her marriage till  attaining 18 yrs. 
of age,  motivating & facilitating institutionalization of deliveries & vaccination for 
pregnant mothers & children, Facilitating health workers for distribution of Iron Folic Acid 
Tablets among Adolescent Girls, Facilitating villagers in getting Voters ID Cards, etc. 
 
11.4 The above activities are being undertaken by NYKS volunteers and members of 
Youth Clubs voluntarily and monetary v aluation of these activities, on an average, are 
Rs.3,000/- Crore per annum. 
 
11.5 Considering the large network of NYKS Volunteers and to extend the coverage, a 
proposal for enhancement of budgetary allocation for implementation of more programmes, 
had be en included in the EFC proposal which is lying with Ministry of Finance for 
consideration.  
 
11.6 During the financial year 2020 -21, Evaluation Study on NYKS functioning was 
carried out by Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA). After the study, IIPA 
considers the significant contributions made by NYKS with inclusively integrated other 
schemes volunteers in COVID-19 situations, proactive approach to disseminate information 
in the communities and strengthen the idea of Aatma Nirbhar Bharat along wi th the positive 
feedback received from the beneficiary volunteers. 
 

11 
 
Recommendation 
12. The Committee recommends that NYKS should develop training programmes for 
inculcating gender parity and respect for all the genders including transgender amongst the 
youth and more vocational training programmes to enhance the employability and 
livelihood prospects of youth volunteers from the backward, tribal and rural areas, latest by 
30th June, 2021. 
[Para 4.18] 
Action Taken 
 
12.1 Noted for Compliance. 
Recommendation 
13. The Committee also recommends that the Department should consider re -naming of 
'Youth Clubs' as 'Yuva Mandali' for a more nationalistic feeling. 
[Para 4.19B] 
Action Taken 
13.1 Suggestion Noted.   Further, File is being put up for soliciting necessary approval 
from the competent authority. 
 
Recommendation 
14. The Committee, therefore, recommends that an active strategy may be chalked out in 
co-ordination with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for rooting out the malaise of 
alcoholism, drug addition and substance abuse afflicting the society, by establishing 
deaddiction centres and through awareness campaigns at the community level by Nehru 
Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) and National Servi ce Scheme (NSS) volunteers, latest by 
30th June, 2021. 
[Para 4.20] 
Action Taken 
14.1 Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS):  
 
Noted for Complianc e for  Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS ). This is also submitted 
that NYKS has been running such programmes in several states. 

12 
 
 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment would also be approached for undertaking 
awareness campaigns at the community level 
 
14.2 National Service Scheme (NSS) : Volunteers regularly undertake activities of Drug 
De-addiction, substance abuse, alcoholism as a part of regular activities in consultation with 
various institutions of State government working under NSS 
Recommendation 
15. The Committee recommends that the Department should encourage 
participation/deployment of more female and transgender National Youth Corps volunteers 
to ensure equitable participation of all genders in the important task of nation building. 
[Para 4.30] 
 
Action Taken 
 
15.1 Noted for Compliance.   Also as per the provision of the selection guideline of 
NYVs, encouragement for selection of female and candidates belonging to weaker sections 
is being given. 
 
Recommendation 
16. The Committee recommends that the Department should make concerted efforts to 
get ISO certifications for the remaining 78 Youth Hostels, out of the total of 84, and 
upgrade/re-design those with modern amenities like Wi -Fi connectivity, well -stocked 
library, reading room with digital access, auditorium for enacting plays, talk shows, 
debates, etc.  
 
The Committee also recommends that the occupancy details in all Youth Hostels may be 
collected and a review conducted in terms of occupancy details and revenue g enerated, 
latest by 30th June, 2021. 
[Para 4.42] 
Action Taken 
 
16.1 The day to day management of the Youth  Hostels is responsibility of the Hostel  
Management Committee chaired by  Secretary (YA)/DC/DM. In compliance   with the 
recommendation made by the  Committee, HMC/Manager/Manager in  charge/DYC, NYKS 

13 
 
of various Youth  Hostels have already been requested vide  letter dated 10.03.2021 & 
reminder dated 08.06.2021 to carry out filed inspection of various Youth Hostels and furnish 
a consolidated report, inclu ding the occupancy details and revenue  generated, in a  
prescribed proforma. It  had also been requested to access the  feasibility and accordingly 
apply for ISO  certification, WiFi, Auditorium, E -library, etc. by utilizing Youth Hostels 
funds. Requisite information from various Youth Hostels and NYKS is still awaited. 
  

14 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee recommends that since capital outlay in both “Education, Sports, 
Arts, Culture” and “North Eastern Areas” were drastically slashed in RE 2020 -21 when 
compared with BE 2020-21, but has now been enhanced in BE 2021-22, the Ministry should 
come up with projects that help develop more capital assets and pick up the pace with 
regard to capital expenditure to ensure that allotted funds are utilised for intended services.  
[Para 2.15] 
Action Taken 
1.1 Department of Youth Affairs   stated that the capital outlay under both Heads – 4202- 
Education, Sports, Arts and Culture and 4552- North Eastern Areas under BE 2020-21 under 
Youth Hostel scheme was a token amount of Rs. 1 Lakh only for the financial year 2020 -21. 
However, as per decis ion taken in the Ministry, for completion of the ongoing construction 
of Youth Hostel, Kota, IFD had been requested at the time of RE 2020 -21 to re-appropriate 
funds amounting to Rs. 1 Crore from Revenue Head to Capital head of the Youth Hostel 
Scheme, which were received towards the fag end of the financial year and hence could not 
be utilized. 
1.2 Further, NITI Aayog i.e. erstwhile Planning Commission has advised not to 
construct any new Youth Hostel but to complete only ongoing projects of Youth 
Hostels. However, the Ministry has been taking up the matter of construction of additional 
new Hostels with NITI Aayog. 
 
Recommendations 
 
2. The Committee recommends that the Department of Sports and Sports Authority of 
India (SAI)Since only 43 National Sports Academics (NSAS) have been set up so far, out of 
the 100 proposed, Department of Sports and Sports Authority of India (SAI) Should exped ite 
the setting up of the remaining 57 Academies. Similarly, Since only 106 Small Khelo India 
Centres (SKICs) have been set up so far, out of the 1000 propose, the setting up of the 
remaining 894 SKICs should be expedited, within the FY 2021 -22.  The commi ttee also 

15 
 
recommends that area -wise identification of predominant/popular sports in all 
states/Districts should be done for setting up Khelo India/SAI Centres in those sports 
disciplines in which the State/District has core competence and impress upon 
States/Districts the need for expeditious implementation. 
[Para 3.11] 
Action Taken 
 
 
2.1. It has been submitted that : (a) Creation and establishing of world class academies 
takes its own time. In the perspective planning for five years, it has been planned to develop 
100 academies.  
(b) At present, 217 Small Khelo India Centres have been notified. It was decided to set 
up 1,000 small Khelo India centres in 5 years. 
 
(c) Sports is a state subject & hence decision to choose the sports in each district has 
been left to the state Government. Suggestion has however been noted  
Recommendation 
 
3. The Committee recommends that the existing 23 SAI National Centres of Excellence 
(NCOE) should be upgraded to High Performance Centres on the model developed in the 
State of Odisha t o provide intensive training in sports disciplines having further medal 
prospects international sporting events.  Efforts should also be made for establishing more 
such centres with equitable   distribution amongst the States. 
[Para 3.12] 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.1 SAI Centres have been designated NCOE across the country to impart specialized 
training to promising athletes in 14 priority disciplines and 10 additional disciplines. With a 
view to provide additional impetus to the preparation of Olympic probable for Tokyo 2021, 
Paris 2024, and Los Angeles 2028 Olympic Games, these NCOEs are being upgraded, 
wherever required, to have state -of-the-art infrastructure and facilities for the designated 
disciplines, best -in-class coaches and support staff for athlete traini ng and modern sports 
science support in fields of medicine, nutrition, psychology and other allied sciences. 
National Centres of Excellence (NCOEs) provides facilities of International standard like 
High Performance Directors, Eminent Coaches, Scientific s taff , Qualified Nutritionist and 
Chef to ensure the best quality training , food and accommodation. 
 

16 
 
Recommendation 
4. The Committee, Accordingly, recommends that in view of the suspension of MPLAD 
Funds for two FYs (2020-21 to 2021-22), on accounts of COVID-19 pandemic, contribution 
by way of CSR Funds may be made permissible for construction of durable sports 
infrastructure under the Khelo India Scheme. 
[Para 3.14] 
Action Taken 
4.1 Efforts will be made to involve private stakeholders, though CSR Fundin g etc., for 
development of sports in the country, including construction of sports infrastructure, under 
the proposed Khelo India Scheme (2021-22 to 2025-26). 
 
Recommendation 
5. The Committee recommends that for development of a holistic sports ecosystem 
across the country, a Sporting Culture Promotion Index and Functional Stadium Index may 
be developed with set parameters to spur healthy competition amongst the States and 
accelerate sports infrastructural development and maintenance, during the FY 2021 -22.  
Mayors of all Municipal Corporations may be urged to take necessary step to convert their 
cities into livewire sporting hubs, during the FY 2021-22. 
[Para 3.20] 
Action Taken 
5.1 The proposals regarding development of Sporting Culture Promotion and Funct ional 
Stadium Indices will be examined. The Department of Sports, Ministry of Youth Affairs and 
Sports has sanctioned 268 sports infrastructure projects in 34 States/UTs across the country 
amounting to ₹ 1714.00 crore under the Khelo India Scheme from 2016 -17. Ministry 
envisages working proactively for the development of sports infrastructure across the 
country. Accordingly, the Ministry of Finance has been requested to approve ₹ 2100.00 
crore for the component of “Creation and Upgradation of sports infrast ructure” in the EFC 
Memorandum for the renewed Khelo India Scheme (2021 -22 to 2025 -26). Regarding 
necessary steps to convert cities into livewire sporting hubs, it is submitted that Sports is a 
State subject and the primary responsibility of development of  Sports rests with the 
State/UT Governments. The Union Government only supplements their efforts by bridging 

17 
 
the critical gaps. Accordingly, the State/UT Governments will be requested to take 
necessary steps in this regard. 
 
5.2 The Department has also  informed that necessary   instructions have been issued to 
the Sports Department of all State/UTs Vide this Ministry’s D.O. letter  no. 
6/4/MYAS/MDSD-2021 dated 19.08.2021. 
Recommendation 
6. The Committee accordingly recommends that high quality training p rogrammes may 
be devised for the development of high calibre national coaches from amongst the retired 
outstanding sportspersons, alumni of SAI Centres/Institutions, Sports Universities, etc. to 
reduce on dependency on international coaches. 
[Para 3.22] 
Action Taken 
6.1 SAI NS NIS, Patiala is regularly conducting the following academic programmes: 
(i)  One year Diploma in Sports Coaching 
(ii) Two years M.Sc in Sports Coaching. 
(iii) Two years Diploma in Sports Medicine 
(iv)  Six Weeks Certificate Course in Sports Coaching. 
(v) Two Weeks Refresher Courses for the State/ working coaches. 
(vi) One to four weeks Skill Development programmes in Sports & Sports Sciences. 
 
6.2 SAI NS NIS, Patiala is producing high caliber coaches, e very effort is being put on 
for the same.  The curriculum of the diploma course, certificate course and refresher courses 
are updated and revised from time to time. 
 
6.3 The Diploma and Certificates awarded by this Institute are globally accepted and in 
the recent times the students/coaches from Nepal, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Bhutan 
attended the Diploma/ Certificate Course at SAI NS NIS, Patiala. 
 
6.4 National Centre for Sports Coaching is being established under NSNIS Patiala to 
impart high quality training to coaches & ex -international athletes. Expression of Interest to 
collaborate with foreign university has been floated & empanelment process is on. Once 
process is completed, with the help of foreign universities, high quality training program 
will be designed. 

18 
 
Recommendation 
7. The Committee strongly recommends that since National Sports Federations (NSFs) 
are Public Authorities under the Right to Information (RTI) Act 2005 and receive funds from 
the Consolidated Fund of India, a legislation along th e lines of the National Sports 
Development Code of India, 2011 may be framed with a view to ensure accountability and 
transparency in selection and training of sportspersons and in their overall functioning, in 
FY 2021-22. 
[Para 3.29] 
Action Taken 
7.1 With a view to ensure accountability, transparency and good governance practices in 
the functioning of National Sports Federations (NSFs) including Indian Olympic 
Association (IOA) , in the year 2011 all the existing Government guidelines/instructions 
were amal gamated and brought out as a comprehensive Code, i.e. National Sports 
Development Code of India, 2011 (Sports Code). The Sports Code contains various 
executive instructions / guidelines towards attaining good governance principles including 
on limits on ag e & tenure of Office Bearers, Model Elections Guidelines, fairness and 
transparency in selection of athletes, measures to combat fraud in age of players; prevention 
of sexual harassment of women in sports; Public Authority under RTI Act, etc. 
7.2 In order to maintain their status as recognized NSF, it is incumbent upon the NSFs to 
follow the provisions prescribed in the National Sports Development Code 2011. 
7.3 The Sports Code 2011 had been challenged in Courts of Law. The Courts have 
upheld the legality of the National Sports Development Code 2011 stating that the 
provisions of the Code have the Force of law. On one occasion, the Hon’ble Delhi High 
Court upheld the validity of Sports Code 2011 in its Order/ Judgement dated 9.5.2014 in 
Writ Petition No. 23 10/2012, which was filed by IOA, stating that “The Central 
Government can insist upon adherence to these provisions, without the aid of legislation”. 
7.4 NSFs are bound to follow the Sports Code 2011, which has the force of law. The 
Code has duly establish ed the framework of good governance in Sports. In the present 
circumstance, there is no need for framing a legislation. 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
Recommendation 
8. The Committee recommends that the Department should take necessary steps to 
expedite the construction of the new campus of National Sports University and also explore 
synergy between NSU and various sports Universities across the country. 
[Para 3.45] 
Action Taken 
8.1 The draft Public Investment Board (PIB) Memorandum on National Sports 
University (NSU) was submitted to Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance dated 
10th November, 2020. The meeting of PIB was held on 15.01.2021 under the Chairmanship 
of Secretary (Expenditure). Thereafter, Ministry of Finance (MoF), vide their I.D. Note 
dated 17.02.2021, approved  the recommendations of Public Investment Board (PIB) for 
setting up of National Sports University at a total financial outlay of Rs. 906.47 crore in a 
period of 3 years. The construction of the University is expected to be completed by 
28.02.2024. 
 
8.2 M/s NBCC (India) Ltd. has been engaged as the Project Management Consultant 
(PMC) for setting up the National Sports University vide MoU dated 25 th Sept. 2019 
between MYAS and NBCC. NBCC (India) engaged M/s Arcop Associates, an architectural 
firm experienced in designing sports infrastructure projects, for preparation of Layout Plan 
of NSU. Layout Plan of NSU was finalized on 04.12.2019.  
 
8.3 In the mean time spade work has already been started as pre investment activities 
and construction of temporary bar racks for security staff has been completed. Further, 
Tender document on EPC basis for construction of NSU has been floated by M/s NBCC on 
01.06.2021 
8.4 The following steps have been initiated to reduce any inordinate delay in 
construction of NSU: 
(i) A Coord ination Committee under Chairmanship of Chief Secretary, Manipur, 
consisting of Vice Chancellor, NSU; Joint Secretary (Sports), Department of Sports; 
Secretary/Commissioner, Youth Affairs & Sports, Govt. of Manipur has also been 
constituted on 16-6-2020 for expeditious completion of the project and to sort out all 
issues. 
(ii) Progress of construction is reviewed by Department of Sports through progress 
report from NBCC, project management consultant for time -bound completion of 
the project. 

20 
 
(iii) Secretary, MDo NER chaired a tripartite meeting (M/o DoNER, Government of 
Manipur, D/o Sports) on 10.11.2020 for an early launch of the National Sports 
University, Imphal. 
 
(iv) Regular intra departmental meetings along with NBCC representatives are held to 
review the financi al and physical progress of construction of NSU and remove the 
bottle necks, if any. 
 
8.5 In so far as exploring the synergy between NSU and various Sports Universities 
across the country is concerned, NSU is still in its inception stage, operating from temporary 
campus in Khuman Lampak Sports Complex, Imphal. Collaborations and tie ups with other 
Sports Universities of the country will be explored once the construction of the Permanent 
campus of NSU is completed and the University starts functioning from its regular campus. 
Recommendation 
9. The Committee recommends that the Department should endeavour to establish the 
National Sports Education Board (NSEB) during the FY 2021 -22 and align it with National 
Education Policy (NEP), 2020 to standardize curriculum for sports education in 
Universities and Schools across the country. 
[Para 3.46] 
Action Taken 
9.1 An Expert Committee comprising of members from relevant stakeholders has been 
constituted to carry out a detailed study which will include interact ions for feedback from 
the stakeholders to serve the purpose of deciding of the modalities for implementation of the 
Budget Announcement i.e. setup of National Sports Education Board for development of 
sportspersons under Khelo India Scheme. The deliberati ons of the Committee are complete 
and the Final Draft Report has been prepared and sent to the members of the Expert 
Committee for their recommendations/suggestions. The National Sports Education Board is 
likely to be established in 2021. 
Recommendation 
10. The Committee recommends that the Department should explore the feasibility of 
establishing Dope Testing Laboratories in eastern, western and southern parts of the 
country and bring suitable Anti-Doping legislation during the FY 2021-22. 
[Para 3.51] 
 
 

21 
 
Action Taken 
10.1 Government of India is contemplating a legislation on anti -doping and it is under 
contemplation to include more number of Anti-Doping Laboratories under the direct control 
and supervision of the National Dope Testing Laboratory (NDTL) in the said draft Bill. If 
the Anti -Doping Act is enacted by the Parliament wit h the above provisions, the 
Government of India can establish at least three Anti -doping Laboratories immediately 
under the control and supervision of NDTL within the ambit of law.  Thus the 
recommendation for establishment of additional Anti -Doping Laboratories in the country is 
a precursor and in consonance with the legal provisions being made in the country. 
 
Recommendation 
11. The Committee also recommends that instead of the current Hindi motto of NSS 
“ससससस सस सससस सस” (swayam se pehle aap), the slogan given by Acharya Vinobha 
Bhave"ससस सससस , सस सस( " main nahin tu hi) may be considered, as it seems more 
meaningful and apt. 
[Para 4.9B] 
Action Taken 
11.1 The current Hindi motto  of NSS (ससससससससससससस) was finalized during the 
presentation before the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India on 6 th August 2020 where the 
earlier motto (ससससससससस) was modified as per the suggestion made by Hon ’ble Prime 
Minister. The same has been conveyed to  PMO vide letter No. A -12041/2/2020-NSS dated 
08.08.2020. 
Recommendation 
 
12. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs may 
in consultation with other Ministries chalk out a proposal for training and using Nehru 
Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) and National Service Scheme (NSS) volunteers for 
publicity campaigns and conducting ground -level impact assessment and evaluation studies 
of various welfare programmes of the Government with an element of remuneration as 
incentive, latest by 30th June, 2021. 
[Para 4.19A] 
 
 
 
Action Taken 

22 
 
 
12.1 Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) : NYKS is engaging youth volunteers for 
undertaking awareness generation activities including publicity campaign on the issues of 
national concern in collaboration with different Ministries.  The same would further be 
promoted with wider coverage and outreac h. Conducting ground level impact assessment 
and evaluation studies of the Government programmes by rural youth associated with 
NYKS may not be feasible as it involves technical and research background knowledge and 
experience.  However, the local youth vo lunteer support services can be provided to the 
impact assessment/ research agency/organization. 
Recommendation 
13. The Committee while appreciating the activities and initiatives taken by the Institute 
notes that the establishment expenditure of the Insti tute is very high compared to the low 
programme expenditure and strongly recommends that the Department should make 
concerted efforts to cut the heavy establishment expenditure of RGNIYD and invest more on 
core programmes and conduct a performance evaluati on or institutional audit to assess the 
quality of work, manpower resources and financial management in the Institute during the 
Financial Year 2021 -22. The Committee also recommends that RGNIYD should evolve 
schemes to become self -reliant by optimal utili sation of the infrastructual and manpower 
resources, assets, institutional strength and professional experience garnered over the years 
for income generation and achieving financial strength. 
[Para 4.47] 
Action Taken 
13.1 RGNIYD is an institution imparting  Training as well as conducting academic 
courses. The training programmes were conducted Pan India. During the Year 2020 -21, 
many of the programmes could not be conducted in face to face mode due to Covid -19 
pandemic and restricted movement of staff and re sources, but many programmes were 
conducted in online mode.  Hence the expenditure for the Training programmes tend ed to 
reduce drastically, which showed a higher ratio of Establishment expenditure on comparison 
with the expenditure on training programme. 
13.2 Inspite of the pandemic situation many short term courses were conducted with low 
expenditure. There were number of programmes conducted online for the NER beneficiaries 
on skill development. Workshops were also conducted on leadership qualities and c oping 

23 
 
with COVID situation etc.  Besides that, utmost care is taken to reduce the establishment 
expenses by strict adherence to the principles of General Financial Rules 2017. 
13.3 The CAG’s Office has conducted their Thematic study of the academic and 
administrative performance of RGNIYD (for a period of five years) during March and April 
2021 and the Report is awaited. The RGNIYD will strictly adhere and act as per the 
observations of the Thematic Audit.  
 
13.4 MOU with Whistling Woods International Limite d, Mumbai and National Institute 
of Technology, Jalandhar have been signed.  In addition to this, many initiatives have been 
taken for introduction of new and need based programmes which will meet the requirements 
of the youth of the country (within the available resources (both academic and 
administrative) and with an idea of generating revenue on its own by RGNIYD so that the 
Institute will  be self-reliant in the days to come. 
Recommendation 
14. The Committee recommends that a special recruitment drive may be conducted to fill 
up the existing vacancies in Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) and National Service 
Scheme (NSS) and Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development (RGNIYD), latest 
by 30th June, 2021. 
[Para 4.48] 
 
Action Taken 
14.1 In Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS), filling up of Vacant Posts is a Top Priority. 
At present a total of 544 posts are vacant against various categories.  
 
14.2 NYKS is in the process of releasing advertiseme nt in respect of filling up of m ajor 
Direct Recruitment vacancies for which the following actions have already been taken: 
i)  The BOG in the 54 th Meeting consented its approval for Selection of IBPS (Institute of   
Banking Personnel Selection) as the Recruitment Agency for NYKS till 31.03.2022 
ii)   A Mandate was given to IBPS for the conduction of Online Recruitment Exam for the  
FY 2021-2022. 
iii)  NYKS is in the process of finalization of Timeline for Recruitment with IBPS. 
  
14.3 Advertisement for filling up of vacant posts on Deputation bas is has been 
advertised. Furthermore, NYKS is holding DPCs for filling up of promotional posts. 

24 
 
 
14.4 While every effort is made to fill up the existing vacancies expeditiously, vacancies 
in NYKS do keep on arising on account of retirement, resignation or p romotion. NYKS is 
committed to speedy filling up of vacancies as per laid down procedure. 
 
14.5 In National Service Scheme (NSS ), the sanctioned strength  is 200 posts of which 
100 posts are filled and 100 posts are vacant as on date. Also,  
 
 There are 59 posts (Group A, B and C) which are vacant for more than two years and 
have come under the deemed abolished category.  
 
 The matter to revive these 59 deemed abolished posts of NSS is under process in 
consultation with Finance Division of Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and Ministry 
of Finance. 
 
 The process to fill up 17 vacant posts of Youth Assistant Grade -I (Group B) and 4 posts 
of Youth Assistant -II (Group C) under Direct Recruitment quota has been submitted to 
Staff Selection Commission  on 15.02.2021. Besides these, process to fill up 5 posts of 
Youth Officer (Group B) under Direct Recruitment quota has been submitted to UPSC 
on 08.03.2021. 
 
 The process to fill up 2 vacant post of Assistant Programme Adviser (Group A) through 
promotion is under process in the Ministry. 
 
 The matter of amendment of recruitment rules for the post of Lower Division Clerk 
(Group C) and Stenographer Grade -III (Group C) is under process. The English version 
of the recruitment rules has been vetted by the Legisla tive Department, M/o Law and 
Justice on 15.02.2021 and the Hindi version of the recruitment rules has been forwarded 
to the Legislative Department for vetting on 11.03.2021 and the same is awaited from 
them. 
 

25 
 
 The proposal for seeking permission to fill up 3 vacant posts of Youth Assistant Grade-II 
(Group C) through promotion of UDC has been submitted to DoPT on 13.04.2021. 
 
14.6 In Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development (RGNIYD),  20 vacancies 
of staff are existing which is 37% of the sanctioned strength. 
14.7  RGNIYD is taking consistent effort in getting approval for the revival of the 16 
lapsed posts and on getting proper orders, action will be taken to fill up these vacancies and 
the other existing vacancies. 
  

26 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee recommends that efforts to identify  Private Schools for development  
as Model Residential Sports Schools in all districts of the  country, as recommended by the 
Committee in its 311th and 315th Reports, should be expedited in a time bound manner, 
latest by 30th June, 2021. 
[Para 3.18] 
Action Taken 
1.1 Recommendations of the Committee have been noted. 
Further Recommendations of the Committee 
1.2 The Committee recommends that a concrete plan may be worked out for 
development of Private Schools as Model Residential Sports Schools in all districts of 
the country to tap every possible talent in several fields of sports.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

27 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED. 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 

28 
 
  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, 
WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 2:00 P.M on 
Friday, the 26th November, 2021 in Committee Room- ‘4’, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building, A- Block, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman 
2.  Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
3. Ms. Sushmita Dev 
4. Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
5. Shri. K.C. Ramamurthy 
6. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
8. Shri Dhal Singh Bisen 
9. Shri Sadashiv Lokhande 
10.  Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
11. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
12. Shri Balak Nath 
13. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
14. Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma 
15. Shri Dharambir Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3.  Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
6. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
  
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He 
then informed them that the modifications as suggested by them in the draft Report on the 
subject “*     * *” in the previous meeting had been incorporated and revised draft had 
been circulated. He then informed that the agenda for the meeting was to deliberate upon the 
following three draft Reports of the Committee: 
* Pertains to other matter 

29 
 
(i) *       * * 
 
(ii) Action Taken Report (ATR) on 325th Report on Demands for Grants (2021-
22) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports; and 
(iii) *       * * 
 
2.    * * *         
3.  The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
4. The Committee decided to present/lay the Report to both the Houses of Parliament during 
the upcoming Session of the Parliament. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Dr. Vinay 
P. Sahasrabuddhe, Chairman of the Committee and in his absence, Shri Bikash Ranjan 
Bhattacharyya, M.P. to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha. Shri Rajendra Agrawal, M.P. 
and in his absence, Shri Dharambir Singh, M.P. were authorized to lay the above mentioned 
Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
5.   The meeting adjourned at 2:52 P.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                       A.K. Mallick  
26th November, 2021                                                                                           Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 * Pertains to other matter 