 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA                 225 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
THE EDUCATIONAL TRIBUNALS BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 20 TH  AUGUST, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK  SABHA ON 20 TH  AUGUST, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2010/SRAVANA, 1932 (SAKA)  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in  

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
THE EDUCATIONAL TRIBUNALS BILL, 2010 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 20 TH  AUGUST, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK  SABHA ON 20 TH  AUGUST, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI  
AUGUST, 2010/SRAVANA, 1932 (SAKA)  

CONTENTS  
  PAGES  
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ...................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. P REFACE ........................................................................................................................ (iii) 
3. R EPORT ......................................................................................................................... 1-11 
4. O BSERVATIONS /R ECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE   ––    AT A GLANCE ................................ 12-16 
5. A NNEXURE ...................................................................................................................... 17-65 
6. M INUTES ........................................................................................................................ 67-74 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE 
(2009-10)  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ----  Chairman   
 2. Shri M. Rama Jois    
 3. Shri N.K. Singh    
 4. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 5. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
 6. Shri N. Balaganga  
 7. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  
 8. Vacant 
 9. Vacant 
 10. Vacant 
  LOK SABHA    
 11. Shri Suresh Angadi    
 12. Shri Kirti Azad    
 13. Shri P.K. Biju    
 14. Shri Jitendrasingh Bundela   
 15. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson   
 16. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar    
 17. Shri Rahul Gandhi    
 18. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda   
 19. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav  
 20. Shri Suresh Kalmadi    
 21. Shri P. Kumar    
 22. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 23. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad  
 24. Shri Sis Ram Ola    
 25. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey   
 26. Shri Tapas Paul    
 27. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
 28. Shri Ashok Tanwar    
 29. Shri Joseph Toppo    
 30. Shri P. Viswanathan    
 31. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi  
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
  Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 

  Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
  Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
  Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
  Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PREFACE  
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliam entary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development, having been authorized by the Committe e, present this Two Hundred and Twenty-fifth Report  
of the Committee on the Educational Tribunals Bill, 2010.* 
2.   In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to the Depar tment-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, th e 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Spe aker, Lok Sabha, referred** the Educational Tribuna ls 
Bill, 2010 (Annexure), as introduced in the Lok Sab ha on the 3rd May, 2010 and pending therein, to the  
Committee on the 13th May, 2010 for examination and report. 
3.   The Bill being a landmark legislation for educ ational reforms in the country, the Committee issue d a 
Press Release for eliciting public opinion. In resp onse, many memoranda on the Bill were received from  
various organizations/individuals. Views of the sta keholders were circulated amongst the members of th e 
Committee and also formed part of the questionnaire  of the Committee referred to the Department of Hig her 
Education for written replies. 
4.   The Committee considered the Bill in three sit tings held on the 29th July, 11th and 18th August, 2010. 
5.   On the 29th July, 2010, the Committee heard th e Secretary, Department of Higher Education on vari ous 
provisions of the Bill. 
6.  The Committee, while drafting the report, relie d on the following: 
(i)  Background Note on the Bill received from the Department of Higher Education; 
(ii) Note on the clauses of the Bill received from the Department of Higher Education; 
(iii)  Verbatim record of the oral evidence taken o n the Bill; 
(iv)  Presentation made and clarification given by the Secretary, Department of Higher Education; 
(v) Memoranda received from organizations/individua ls; and 
(vi) Replies to questionnaire received from the Dep artment of Higher Education. 
7.  The Committee considered its Draft Report on th e Bill and adopted the same in its meeting held on 18th 
August, 2010. 
8.   For facility of reference, observations and re commendations of the Committee have been printed in bold 
letters at the end of the report. 
 
OSCAR FERNANDES 
 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman,  
August 18, 2010 Department-related Parliamentary  
Sravana  27, 1932 ( Saka ) Standing Committee on 
  Human Resource Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT  
I.  INTRODUCTION  
1.1  The Educational Tribunals Bill, 2010 was refer red to the Department-related Parliamentary Standin g 
Committee on Human Resource Development by the Hon’ ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha under Rule 270 of the 
Rules of Procedure and  Conduct of Business in the Council of States on the 13th May, 2010 for examina tion 
and report. 
1.2  The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bi ll reads as follows: 
“The goals of expansion in higher education to effectively compete with other countries can be achieved 
only if the regulatory regime and dispute-settlemen t process engender credibility and assurance. It is , 
therefore, proposed to establish a two-tier structure of Educational Tribunals at national and state l evel 
to adjudicate on the entire gamut of disputes that arise in the higher education system through a fast  
track, speedy recourse to justice delivery. Such a reform of institutional structure would enable building 
an effective system of checks and balances in highe r education which would help the orderly growth of 
the sector.”  
1.3  The Secretary, Department of the Higher Educat ion, in her deposition before the Committee, gave t he 
background for bringing the proposed legislation. T he National Policy on Education, 1986, inter alia,  
advocated establishment of tribunals at the nationa l and state level on the lines of Administrative Tr ibunals. 
The Programme of Action, 1992 of the National Polic y on Education also envisaged setting up of Educati onal 
Tribunals, considering the large volume of legal di sputes generated in the education system. The Supre me 
Court, in the TMA Pai Judgment, had suggested the e stablishment of Educational Tribunals at district level so 
that teachers did not suffer through substantial costs in litigation. The Law Commission in its 123rd Report on 
“Decentralisation of Administration of Justice: Dis putes involving Centre of Higher Education” had 
recommended that “in the larger interests of the ju stice system as well as in the interest of the cent res of 
education and in public interest, a separate and sp ecific model for resolution of disputes arising in the field of 
education is the felt need of the time.” 
1.4  The Committee was given to understand that the  rationale behind bringing about the proposed Bill, were 
the limitations of the Administrative Tribunals Act  and other existing laws. Both the jurisdiction and  scope of 
the Administrative Tribunals Act was limited. Five State Administrative Tribunals for the entire count ry have 
proved to be too inadequate leading to over crowdin g and delays in disposal of cases. The other existi ng laws 
like those dealing with consumer protection, powers  of the regulatory bodies in education, the industr ial 
disputes, and the arbitrations under Universities A ct have their own limitations. In such a scenario, the 
proposed Bill sought to cover all categories of higher educational institutions with the exception of institutions 
dealing with education on agriculture. Disputes rel ating to service matters of employees and teachers,  unfair 
practices of managements, issues relating to affili ation with universities, regulation and overlapping  of 
statutory bodies would fall under the domain of the Bill 
1.5  The Committee was informed that rapid growth i n higher education sector and the entry of a large 
number of private institutions therein over the years had resulted in proliferation in litigation involving various 
stakeholders in higher education like students, tea chers, employees, managements of institutions, univ ersities 
etc. At present, there are 504 university level ins titutions - 243 state publicly funded universities,  53 state 
privately funded universities, 40 central universit ies, 130 deemed to be universities and 33 instituti ons of 
national importance, and 25951 colleges. At the beg inning of academic year 2009-10, the total number o f 

students enrolled in universities and colleges has been reported at 136.42 lakhs. The regular faculty strength 
was 5.89 lakhs at the beginning of 2009-10. With re spect to technical education, intake has been repor ted at 
14,09,742 students in 7272 institutions at the degr ee level and 5,08,157 in 2324 institutions at the d iploma 
level of programmes. Enrolment in Distance learning in IGNOU alone is reported to be 2.5 million in 2009-10. 
1.6  On a specific query about the latest data rela ting to number of litigation cases, the Department informed 
that there was no comprehensive empirical data avai lable at present. As per the limited information sh ared by 
the Department, 305 cases pertaining to eleven Cent ral universities were pending in high courts alone in the 
Year 2009 which meant on an average 28 cases pendin g per university. At this rate, about 15,000 cases could 
be reasonably estimated to be pending in only the h igh courts of the country, besides cases pending in  other 
courts and the Supreme Court. Committee’s attention  was also drawn to classification of education rela ted 
cases by the Supreme Court as matters relating to e xamination, introduction/abolition of languages, sy llabi, 
withholding/cancellation of results, evaluation of marks, expulsion of students, tuition fee, manageme nt of 
educational institutions and others. This classific ation gave a fair idea as to the nature of disputes  that were 
being adjudicated at present by the Apex Court, bes ides being indicative of the extent of the educatio n related 
litigation. 
1.7  On a specific query about the status of court cases in private institutions, the Committee was in formed 
that with the increasing role of private sector in this area, grievances of teachers as well as studen ts have also 
increased manifold. The situation has been further aggravated due to lack of formal systems of redress al of 
grievances in private institutions. Not only this, unfair practices like charging of capitation fees, under-
payment to the employees, issuing of misleading advertisements etc. were rampant in private institutions. 
1.8  The Committee observes that no specific assessment about the quantum of litigation in different 
categories of higher educational institutions both in the Government and private sector has been carried 
out recently by the Department. However, phenomenal  growth of higher educational institutions, 
specifically in the private sector with new diversi fying courses emerging in the recent past has no do ubt 
also resulted indirectly in the disturbing increase  in the number of court cases. It is also true that  fast 
track mechanisms are definitely more effective and productive as compared to regular courts which are 
overburdened and by all accounts struggling to ensure reduction of the huge pendency of cases. Against 
this backdrop, the Committee welcomes the proposed legislation for setting up dedicated tribunals for 
resolving all conceivable disputes relating to higher educational institutions.  
II.  CONSULTATION PROCESS  
2.1  Since the proposed legislation involves settin g up of State Education Tribunals, the Department w as 
asked to furnish details of consultation process undertaken by it. In response, the Committee was informed that 
the draft legislative proposal was referred to the Chief Secretaries of all State Governments and the 
Administrations of Union Territories on the 10th Ju ly, 2009. Draft proposal was also discussed in the meeting 
of Secretaries in charge of Education of State Governments convened on 23rd July, 2009. While the Education 
Secretaries of Orissa and Gujarat Governments shared their experience of Educational Tribunals set up in their 
States, Education Secretary of Haryana had expresse d reservation about the financial viability of the three-tier 
structure of tribunals. The Committee was further i nformed that only State Governments of Madhya Prade sh, 
Chhattisgarh, Kerala and Himachal Pradesh had supported the proposal. As no response opposing the proposal 
was received from the other State Governments, thei r support was consequently presumed. The final 
consultations culminated into a resolution passed b y CABE in its 56th meeting held on 31st August, 200 9 

attended by Education Ministers of 19 States who su pported the establishment of Tribunals at state and  
national level. 
2.2  The Committee is of the view that education being a  concurrent subject, the proposal for setting 
up State Educational Tribunals, needed a wider cons ultation process involving all the State 
Governments and Union Territories. With only very few States having formally supported the proposed 
Bill and in the absence of any opposition from the majority of the States/UTs, their presumed support 
does not seem to be very convincing. Not only this,  the Committee observes that out of the Education 
Ministers of 19 States who attended the CABE meetin g, quite a few were representing school Education 
Department. The Committee is, therefore, of the opi nion that concerted efforts should have been made 
by the Department so as to ensure the specific response of all the States/UTs on the proposed legislation.  
2.3  The Committee has been given to understand tha t text of the Bill was not circulated formally to t he 
central higher educational institutions. The Ministry did not consider it necessary to formally obtain  the views 
of these institutions since the proposed tribunals were in no way considered to be encroaching upon the dispute 
resolution mechanism already existing in these inst itutions. The Committee finds that the Department h as 
simply relied upon the feedback received during the  extensive investigations and consultations on the issue 
undertaken by the Law Commission before finalizing its 123rd Report. The Law Commission had, in fact 
issued a working paper along with a questionnaire a nd gave it wide publicity. Even Association of Indi an 
Universities circulated this working paper to all t he universities with a request that every Universit y may 
discuss the working paper in a one-day seminar in w hich all members of the university community would 
participate and forward their recommendations to the Law Commission. A seminar was accordingly organized 
on the 2nd May, 1987 which was attended by more than sixty-one Vice-Chancellors. 
2.4  The Committee is not at all convinced with this jus tification given by the Department. The 
Committee would like to point out that the feedback  received by the Law Commission is quite old. 
Higher Education Scenario at present is totally different with as many as 504 university level institutions 
functioning with every possibility of further expan sion in future. Not only this, central higher 
educational institutions would be affected by the p roposed Bill even though it does not encroach upon 
their existing grievance redressal mechanism. The Committee, therefore, opines that it would have been 
appropriate if central higher educational institutions were also consulted on the proposed Bill.  
2.5  Committee’s attention has also been drawn to the fa ct that this proposed legislation shall be 
applicable to all types of higher educational insti tutions, both private and public institutions there by 
bringing the private higher education institutions under the purview of the proposed State and National 
Tribunals. However, the Committee notes that in the process of consultations, representatives of private 
institutions have not been engaged. Needless to men tion, a segment of the stakeholders has not been 
consulted at all. The Department’s assertion that status of incidence of litigation in private institutions is 
likely to be very high due to increasing role of pr ivate sector and also lack of internal forum for di spute 
resolution, further establishes failure of vision i n not consulting these institutions. The Committee is of 
the view that it was very necessary to involve the stakeholders of private institutions in the consult ation 
process, specially due to every likelihood of their different/additional problem areas. The Committee has 
also noted that the tribunals created by the legisl ation shall also have jurisdiction over the institu tions 
engaged in medical disciplines. However, the Department has conceded that no direct consultations with 
regulatory bodies like Medical Council of India and Dental Council of India have been undertaken. The 
Committee can only conclude that consultation proce ss on the proposed Bill has been far from 

satisfactory and the whole exercise seems to be a h urried affair whereby important stakeholders have 
been either ignored or their consent presumed in case of nil response.  
2.6  In order to fill the vacuum with respect to consult ation with the States, the Committee tried to 
facilitate wider consultations by issuing a Press Release on the Bill inviting suggestions from the ge neral 
public. In response, the Committee received memoran da from a good number of 
organizations/individuals on the proposed legislati on. This feedback was circulated amongst the 
members of the Committee and issues raised therein were referred to the Department of Higher 
Education for their response. The Committee hopes that by obtaining the views from diverse groups, the 
consultation process on the Bill has been widened.  
III.  Broadly speaking, the Committee supports the propo sed legislation, with observations/recommendations 
on some of the provisions of the Bill as indicated below:–– 
CLAUSE 2  
3.1  Clause 2 of the Bill deals with the applicabil ity of the Act which is as follows:- 
“This Act shall apply to all higher educational institutions other than the higher educational institutions 
engaged mainly in agricultural education and research.”  
  The Committee finds that this provision does not make it clear whether the proposed Bill would apply to 
private, aided or unaided institutions, deemed to be universities etc. The Committee has been informed that the 
proposed legislation covers all higher educational institutions, both private and public. All institut ions be it 
central, deemed or state universities, institutions  of national importance, general educational instit utions or 
professional educational institutions like medical and law colleges or universities have been covered under the 
Bill. The Committee is, however, of the view that institu tions of diversified fields of education both 
under Government and private sector intended to be brought under the jurisdiction of Educational 
Tribunals be clearly specified in Clause 2 so as to  remove any ambiguity and likely complications in 
future.  
IV.  CLAUSE 4  
4.1  This clause empowers the State Governments/Cen tral Government in respect of Union Territories to 
establish a State Educational Tribunal. It also emp owers the State Governments to notify any Education al 
Tribunal existing before the commencement of the pr oposed legislation as State Educational Tribunal wi th 
provisions of this Act being applicable to such a Tribunal. 
4.2  The Committee notes that at present, only two States, i.e.  Orissa and Gujarat have State Educational 
Tribunals. The State Educational Tribunal in Orissa  set up under a State Act has been functioning sinc e 1974. 
Matters like service conditions of Teachers, Grant- in-Aid, Accounts and Audit and closing down of only  
Aided Educational Institutions functioning in the S tate come under the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. The 
Committee also notes that as per the details furnis hed by the Department, Gujarat has two State Tribun als i.e.  
Gujarat University Services Tribunal and Gujarat Af filiated Colleges Services Tribunal. Jurisdiction o f these 
two State Educational Tribunals also seems to be li mited. The Committee would like to point out that t he 
domain of State Educational Tribunals as envisaged under the Bill would be very wide with all categori es of 
higher educational institutions both under the priv ate and Government Sector coming under them. Not on ly 
this, their powers would also be wide-ranging. It i s not known whether the State Government would be 
agreeable to notify the existing Tribunal under the  proposed legislation. The Committee is not clear about 

the status of the existing State Tribunals in case the State Governments do not agree to notify them 
under the proposed legislation. Further, the Commit tee has no idea as to whether all the provisions 
regarding the State Tribunal would be acceptable to  the State Governments. The Committee is of the 
view that all ambiguity in this regard needs to be removed at the earliest.  
V.   CLAUSES 5 AND 6  
5.1  Clause 5 provides that each State Educational Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and two oth er 
Members. Clause 6 lays down the qualifications for appointments as Chairperson or Member of State 
Educational Tribunal as per which sitting/Ex-Judge of a High Court will be the Chairperson and Vice-
Chancellor/Ex- Vice-Chancellor and Chief Secretary/Ex-Chief Secretary/person of equivalent rank will b e the 
two members of the State Tribunal. The Committee was given to understand that the structure of the tri bunals, 
their jurisdiction and powers were all patterned on  the recommendations of the Law Commission made in its 
123rd Report. The Committee, however, finds that th e proposed composition of the State Tribunals is no t in 
tune with the recommendation of the Law Commission which has suggested a five member State level tribunal 
comprising of a Chairperson (Judicial), two judicia l members and two academic/administrative members. It 
has been indicated that most of the States are in f avour of three-member State Educational Tribunal. F urther, 
State Tribunal is supposed to act as a bench having  the representation of judiciary, administration an d 
academia. It has been suggested by the Department t hat depending on the experience gained by the State  
Tribunals, the number of members can be reviewed in future. 
5.2  The Committee believes that it would be practically  very difficult for a three member Tribunal to 
take up a sizeable number of cases, leave alone the  issue of expeditious disposal thereof. The Committee 
finds the suggestion of Law Commission as practical  and balanced as a five-member State Educational 
Tribunal will prove to be more effective.  The Committee observes that level of cases filed i n the two States 
having State Education Tribunals gives an idea abou t the outreach of proposed three-member State Educa tion 
Tribunals. Total number of cases filed in Orissa Education Tribunal in 2007, 2008 and 2009 were 347,499 and 
428 respectively. This is the position when jurisdi ction of this Tribunal is a limited one. Similarly,  during the 
first seven months of 2010, while 827 cases were fi led before the Gujarat University Services Tribunal , 250 
cases were filed before the Gujarat Affiliated Colleges Services Tribunal during this period. The Committee is 
well aware of the fact that these two State Educati on Tribunals cover only a very limited aspect of 
litigation. Nobody can also dispute the fact that t he proposed legislation envisages bringing under th e 
purview of tribunals, litigation related to all con ceivable aspects of higher educational institutions  with 
the number of cases going up by many times that of what obtains at present. In such a scenario, a thre e 
member State Educational Tribunal will perhaps not prove to effective. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends setting up of five-member State Education Tribunals.  
5.3  Committee’s attention has also been drawn by anothe r allied aspect relating to setting up of State 
Educational Tribunals. There are both small and big  States in the country. Not only this, while some o f 
the States have a very large concentration of all c ategories of higher educational institutions, very few 
institutions are there in other States. In such a s cenario, the Committee strongly feels that one 
educational tribunal per State cannot be made unifo rmly applicable across all the States. The 
Committee, therefore, is of the view that this issu e needs to be examined thoroughly and a viable 
mechanism for setting up State Educational Tribunals worked out.  
5.4  Clause 6(2) of the Bill provides that a person  qualified to be appointed as a member of the State  
Educational Tribunal should not be less than 55 yea rs of age. Similar provision has been made in respe ct of 

member of the National Educational Tribunal as in c lause 22(2). The Committee does not understand the 
rationale for fixing such a minimum age limit. Pres cribing the minimum age limit to fifty five years 
could lead to ineligibility of otherwise competent people. The Supreme Court judgment in the Union of 
India vs  R. Gandhi, Madras Bar Association states that if t ribunals are to function efficiently and 
effectively, they should be able to attract younger members who have a reasonable period of service. The 
Committee is of the view that in order to have a dynamic system of dispute resolution, youngsters should 
be engaged in the tribunals and to achieve that obj ective, the prescription of minimum age of fifty fi ve 
years should be revisited. Competent person with ad equate knowledge and experience, irrespective of 
his/her age should be considered for making the tribunals a successful mechanism for speedy disposal of 
cases.  
VI.  CLAUSE 12  
6.1  Clause 12 of the Bill provides for senior most  member of State Educational Tribunal to act as its  
Chairperson in the event of any vacancy arising due  to death, resignation, absence and illness in the office of 
the Chairperson. The Bill states that the State Edu cational Tribunals shall be composed of a Chairpers on and 
two members. The Chairperson of the Tribunal should be a judge of the High Court while one member shou ld 
have experience of being the Vice-Chancellor and the other the Chief Secretary in the State Government. Thus, 
only the Chairperson has judicial experience. In th e event of the Chairperson’s seat being vacant, the  Bill 
allows the two members to hear cases. This clause leaves the possibility of cases being heard without a judicial 
member. 
6.2  Advocating a three member tribunal, the Depart ment has clarified that the state tribunal is suppo sed to 
act as a bench, in which the judiciary, the adminis tration and the academia are equally represented fo r a fair 
and objective adjudication. The disputes in the edu cation sector not only require the expertise of a l egal 
luminary but also the experience of administration and academia. The absence of the Chairperson is 
contemplated only in certain cases and not as a mat ter of routine and therefore increasing the number of 
judicial members only to meet such special situations was not considered viable. 
6.3  The Committee would like to draw the attention of t he Department to the recent recommendation 
of the Supreme Court which states that every two me mber bench of the Tribunal should always have a 
judicial member. Whenever any large or special benc hes are constituted, the number of technical 
members shall not exceed the judicial member. Keepi ng this in view, the Committee finds that Clause 
12(2) violates the judgment of the Supreme Court as  in the event of vacancy of the seat of Chairperson , 
the non-judicial member would chair the bench. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a re-
thinking on the part of the Ministry is required and suitable amendment inserted.  
VII.  CLAUSE 15(c)  
7.1  Clause 15(c) provides for the jurisdiction, po wers and authority of the State Educational Tribuna ls with 
respect to ‘matters relating to use of unfair pract ices, by any higher educational institution, which has been 
specifically prohibited under any law for the time being in force.’ The Committee notes that the term 
‘Unfair Practice’ has not been defined in the Bill.  It has been given to understand that unfair practi ces are 
comprehensively defined in a separate legislation n amely the ‘Prohibition of Unfair Practices in Techn ical 
Educational Institutions, Medical Educational Insti tutions and Universities Bill, 2010’ which proposes  to 
prohibit and punish the unfair practices in the ent ire higher education sector, This Bill is pending a nd yet to 
become an Act. The Committee believes that without defining the term, ‘unfair practices’, it will be open 

to interpretation by the tribunals and courts. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the definition 
of the term ‘unfair practices’ as in the aforesaid Bill should be incorporated in the Educational 
Tribunals Bills, 2010 in the form of a definition to avoid any confusion.  
VIII. CLAUSE 21  
8.1  Clause 21 provides for the composition of the National Educational Tribunal. This tribunal shall consist 
of a Chairperson and such number of Members not exc eeding eight to be appointed by the Central 
Government. Out of the eight Members, two shall be judicial members, three shall be academic members a nd 
three shall be administrative members. 
8.2  Law Commission had recommended five-member ape x level Tribunal comprising of three judicial 
members and two academic/administrative members. Ho wever, the Bill proposes to have three judicial 
members and three academic and three administrative  members in the National Tribunal. The justificatio n 
given by the Ministry is that there would be three self-contained benches of the National Tribunal. 
8.3  The Committee expresses its reservations about the representation of as many as three 
Secretaries/ex-Secretaries to Government of India/e quivalent rank in the National Tribunal. The 
Committee believes that this may lead to bureaucrat ization of the tribunal. Further, as Secretary leve l 
officers remain highly preoccupied with their assig nments, their availability for sittings of National  
Educational Tribunal may not be so easy. These issu es need to be kept in mind and the composition of 
National Educational Tribunal may be reviewed accordingly.  
IX.  CLAUSE 23  
9.1  Clause 23 of the Bill deals with the compositi on of the Selection Committee which shall recommend  a 
panel for appointment of the Chairperson and Member s of the National Educational Tribunal. The Selecti on 
Committee shall consist of: the Chief Justice of th e Supreme Court or his nominee as the Chairperson a nd 
Secretaries, Higher Education, Law and Justice Medi cal Education and Personnel and Training as members . 
Attention of the Department was drawn to only Secre taries being members of the Selection Committee 
indicating somewhat imbalance between academic and administrative domains. In response, the Committee 
was given to understand that composition of the Sel ection Committee was similar to that of the Nationa l 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission. Member Secr etaries will be recommending eminent persons from 
their respective spheres. Reason given for not havi ng more academic members is that they might be 
functionaries in academic or regulatory bodies and there might be a clash of interest. 
9.2  The Committee is not convinced by the justification  given by the Department. It believes that the 
composition of the Selection Committee should be a balanced one as it would be appointing the 
Chairperson and members of the National Tribunals w ho would be discharging an important task of 
adjudicating on disputes primarily related to educa tional matters. Therefore, adequate representation 
of the academia should be ensured in the Selection Committee so that the basic spirit behind the 
proposed legislation is not defeated.  
X.  CLAUSE 51  
10.1  Clause 51 provides for the non-applicability of this Bill to minority institutions the extent to  which they 
are inconsistent with the functions and powers vested upon the National Commission for Minority Educational 
Institutions established by National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions Act, 2004 or pro visions 
contained in that Act. It was clarified by the Mini stry that minority institutions would come under the purview 

of the Bill and only those provisions which are inc onsistent with the NCMEI Act would not apply. The 
Committee agrees with the stand taken by the Minist ry as the service matters, disciplinary matters etc . 
of the minority institutions would definitely fall under the proposed Bill and this in any way would n ot 
contravene the NCMEI Act. A dispute between a minor ity educational institution and a statutory 
regulatory body, arising not due to the minority ch aracter of the institution would not come under the  
purview of the Commission.  
XI.  GENERAL OBSERVATIONS  
11.1  The Committee had the occasion to deliberate on the functioning of Tribunals in the country. It has been 
observed that majority of the tribunals created in the past have failed to deliver hassle free and spe edy justice. 
In fact, there is a general perception that these t ribunals are an attempt to bypass the regularly est ablished 
courts and they have not been successful in easing off the pressure of the courts. There are views tha t the 
elongation of penalty system through these tribunals makes the delivery of adjudication more complicated. The 
very fact that inspite of the existence of an administrative tribunal dealing with service matters, a need was felt 
for a tribunal exclusively for educational matters, is an indication that all is not well with the existing tribunals. 
It may be because of the non-execution of orders of  the tribunals. The Committee is therefore, of the view 
that Government needs to identify the lacunae and w eaknesses of existing tribunals system and then 
address them in the right perspective. The Committee would also like to emphasize that the orders of the 
Tribunals should have some force so that they are complied with within a specified period of time.  
11.2  Reservations have been expressed by some stak eholders about the need of the proposed Bill. They 
opined that a separate law to make provisions for settlement of educational disputes, in addition to the existing 
laws in force, is not desirable as the implementati on of multiple laws becomes difficult and tend to c reate 
litigations among stakeholders. Multiplicity of laws in the existing regulatory framework in higher education is 
one of the major flaws, as is observed by National Knowledge Commission (NKC), which is not conducive to 
innovation or creativity in higher education. The M inistry has agreed that tribunals are indisputably 
proliferating. The Law Commission, on the other han d, in its pursuit for decentralization of monolithi c 
administration of justice in the country, has tende d to support the setting up of educational tribunal s. The 
Committee hopes that the tribunals as proposed unde r the Bill do not in any way hinder the quality, 
innovation and creativity in higher education and are able to deliver their mandate efficiently.  
11.3  Another viewpoint which came to the notice of  the Committee was that the provisions in respect o f 
National Educational Tribunal should be deleted from the Bill. All tribunals within the territorial jurisdiction of 
the High Court fall within its jurisdiction both un der Articles 226-227 and 228 of the Constitution as  held by 
seven judges ‘bench in Chandra Mohan’s case. Theref ore, constitution of Appellate Tribunal is inconsis tent 
with the scheme of the Constitution. It was also su ggested that, an Educational Division, on the lines  of 
Commercial Division may be created in each High Cou rt to hear appeals against the decisions of the Sta te 
Tribunals. The Committee is of the opinion that the provision regarding setting up of National 
Educational Tribunal is within the judicial verdict  as in Chandra Mohan’s case. Regarding the setting 
up of Educational Division, the Committee is of the view that since the Government is implementing the 
Commercial dispute bench for the first time, it can consider formation of such benches by increasing the 
number of High Court judges and Supreme Court judges whenever it plans to abolish the tribunals.  
11.4  The Committee would like to highlight another  area of concern which is speedy resolution of disp utes.
Reservations have been expressed regarding not spec ifying any time limit for adjudication in the propo sed 
legislation. It has been pointed out that a time limit for completion of a dispute may be difficult to be included, 

since some of the complicated cases may take a long er time. There has been a suggestion that the Bill may 
provide for interim order by the tribunals. The Committee is also apprehensive that due to the complex 
structure of the tribunals, a greater level of liti gation may be encouraged. Also, some of the procedu res 
under the proposed Bill may lead to delays in the d elivery of speedy justice. The Department has, 
however, clarified that the tribunals are expected to deliver fast-track conclusive adjudication and hence 
provision for interim orders may not be necessary. The Committee hopes that these tribunals would be 
successful in discharging their mandate for a fast-track speedy justice to all the litigants. The Committee 
feels that in a democracy there is always some scop e for improvement in the administration system and 
therefore efforts to simplify the complex procedure s should continue for a more easier and faster 
resolution of disputes.  
11.5  It has been alleged that the setting up of St ate Educational Tribunals and the National Educatio nal 
Tribunal is not a rational decision from the financ ial point of view as it would be an additional burd en on the 
State and Central exchequer. As per the financial m emorandum of the Bill, while one time capital inves tment 
on one tribunal is estimated to be about Rs.10 crore, recurring expenditure for the National Education Tribunal 
and for one State Educational Tribunal is Rs.1.25 c rore and Rs.1 crore respectively. The Committee believes 
that before setting up tribunals, the magnitude of cases and costs incurred in litigation should be 
assessed.  The Ministry has quoted from the report of the Law Commission: which states as follows: 
“the establishment of the proposed tribunals would be an un-economic venture. This raises a vital issu e 
of expenditure on administration of justice. It is at present being treated as non-development 
expenditure... A society without a system of effici ent administration of justice in our parliamentary 
democracy is inconceivable... Diversification and d ecentralization of administration of justice may 
necessitate specialist tribunals in certain well-defined areas where even if the workload is not suffi cient, 
tribunals must be set up so as to relieve the conge stion and burden on the generalist courts, to be 
precise, High Courts and the Supreme Court, thereby  achieving the more desired result of speedy and 
expeditious disposal of disputes, avoiding strife and tension in the society.”  
  The Committee is of the view that if the tribunals proposed to be established serve their desired 
purpose and ease off the pressure from the courts, expenditure on them would be justified. However, if  
they do not serve the desired purpose, the Ministry  should keep in mind the extent of wasteful 
expenditure on the same. The Committee recommends for fixing minimum court fee in case of tribunals 
as well which could consolidate the financial viability thereof.  
11.6  The Committee observes that the Law Commissio n had recommended a three-tier structure of 
Educational Tribunals, at national, state and distr ict level. Similarly, in the TMA Pai case, the Supr eme Court 
had ruled that an educational tribunal needs to be set up in each district in a state, so as to ensure  speedy 
disposal of cases. The Committee, however, notes th at the Bill proposes to have only National and Stat e 
Educational Tribunals. The Committee also takes not e of the following justification given by the Depar tment 
in this regard: 
---- In the consultation process, many States were opposed to having third tier at the district level, as it 
would not be viable. 
---- Cost factor involved was quite prohibitive. Fo r setting up tribunals in the 604 districts, Rs.302  
crore would be required as non-recurring expenditur e and recurring cost of Rs. 120 crore every 
year. 

---- Out of the 604 districts, 374 districts have b een identified as having a very few Higher Educational 
Institutions. 
11.7  The Committee feels that a view can be taken for se tting up of district level Tribunals in the 230 
districts having higher concentration of educationa l institutions. The other alternative in Committee’ s 
view can be to have one district level Tribunal for  2-3 districts based on the number of institutions in 
these districts. The Committee would also like to d raw the attention of the Ministry to the fact that 
Supreme Court in T.M. Pai Judgement while recommend ing district level Tribunals had suggested that 
the district Tribunals can hold circuit/camp sittin gs in different districts. The Committee would 
appreciate if the viability of all alternatives can be assessed and required action taken accordingly. 
11.8  The Committee has noted that the word ‘studen ts’ has not been included in the proposed Bill thou gh it 
finds place in the Preamble. The students are a maj or stakeholder as far as this Bill is concerned. In  fact, they 
are the victims of unfair practices in terms of rag ging, charging capitation fees and other institutio nal 
malpractices. The Committee believes that the students are the so ul of an institution and their interests 
should be protected and taken care of. This could o nly be made possible by including the word 
‘students’ in the substantive clause.  The Ministry has submitted that the students have not been left out of 
the legislation. The grievances of the students are most likely to arise out of certain unfair practices adopted by 
some higher educational institutions. The State Tri bunals are empowered under Clause 15(c) of the Bill  to 
entertain all cases relating to unfair practices br ought before it by any person which includes studen ts also. A 
separate but inter-connected Bill, namely Prohibiti on of Unfair Practices in Technical Educational Ins titutions 
and Universities Bill, 2010 has been introduced in the Parliament which seeks to protect the interests  so 
students against all types of unfair practices. The Committee is not convinced by the Ministry’s 
justification as there is no harm in including the word ‘students’ in the Bill and making it apparentl y 
clear for the students themselves so that they can seek justice and safeguard their interests.  
11.9  Reservations have been expressed by stakehold ers of private institutions regarding the proposed 
tribunals to follow the same yardstick for the public and private institutions. It is a well known fact that private 
institutions implement various incentives and accelerated increment options to enthuse and encourage qualified 
teaching faculty to join their institutions and con tinue serving their institutions. However, recruitm ent and 
promotion policy is different in the public institu tions. The Committee wonders as to how the tribunals 
would deliver justice in respect of public and priv ate institutions with different policies. They woul d 
have to devise separate mechanism for private insti tutions based on the principle of natural justice. 
Same yardstick for both public and private institut ions would not work out well as it will give rise t o 
various litigations and also dampen the innovative mechanisms followed by private institutions. The 
Committee hopes that this may be clarified in the proposed Bill.  
11.10  Suggestion of giving representation to Scheduled Caste and Tribes (SCs & STs) in the state and national 
tribunals has been received. The Committee is of the view that interests of SCs & STs should be protected 
and due representation given to them.  
12.  The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the bill without any amendments. 
13.  The enacting formula and the title are adopted  with consequential changes. 
14.  The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the amendments/additions  
suggested by it. 

15.  The Committee would like the Department to sub mit a note with reasons on the 
recommendations/suggestions which could not be incorporated in the Bill. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS –– AT A GLANCE  
INTRODUCTION  
  The Committee observes that no specific assessmen t about the quantum of litigation in different 
categories of higher educational institutions both in the Government and private sector has been carried 
out recently by the Department. However, phenomenal  growth of higher educational institutions, 
specifically in the private sector with new diversi fying courses emerging in the recent past has no do ubt 
also resulted indirectly in the disturbing increase  in the number of court cases. It is also true that  fast 
track mechanisms are definitely more effective and productive as compared to regular courts which are 
overburdened and by all accounts struggling to ensure reduction of the huge pendency of cases. Against 
this backdrop, the Committee welcomes the proposed legislation for setting up dedicated tribunals for 
resolving all conceivable disputes relating to higher educational institution. (Para 1.8)  
CONSULTATION PROCESS 
  The Committee is of the view that education being  a concurrent subject, the proposal for setting 
up State Educational Tribunals, needed a wider cons ultation process involving all the State 
Governments and Union Territories. With only very few States having formally supported the proposed 
Bill and in the absence of any opposition from the majority of the States/UTs, their presumed support 
does not seem to be very convincing. Not only this,  the Committee observes that out of the Education 
Ministers of 19 States who attended the CABE meetin g, quite a few were representing school Education 
Department. The Committee is, therefore, of the opi nion that concerted efforts should have been made 
by the Department so as to ensure the specific response of all the States/UTs on the proposed legislation. 
       (Para 2.2)  
  The Committee is not at all convinced with this j ustification given by the Department. The 
Committee would like to point out that the feedback  received by the Law Commission is quite old. 
Higher Education Scenario at present is totally different with as many as 504 university level institutions 
functioning with every possibility of further expan sion in future. Not only this, central higher 
educational institutions would be affected by the p roposed Bill even though it does not encroach upon 
their existing grievance redressal mechanism. The Committee, therefore, opines that it would have been 
appropriate if central higher educational institutions were also consulted on the proposed Bill.  
       (Para 2.4)  
  Committee’s attention has also been drawn to the fact that this proposed legislation shall be 
applicable to all types of higher educational insti tutions, both private and public institutions there by 
bringing the private higher education institutions under the purview of the proposed State and National 
Tribunals. However, the Committee notes that in the process of consultations, representatives of private 
institutions have not been engaged. Needless to men tion, a segment of the stakeholders has not been 
consulted at all. The Department’s assertion that status of incidence of litigation in private institutions is 
likely to be very high due to increasing role of pr ivate sector and also lack of internal forum for di spute 
resolution, further establishes failure of vision i n not consulting these institutions. The Committee is of 
the view that it was very necessary to involve the stakeholders of private institutions in the consult ation 
process, specially due to every likelihood of their different/additional problem areas. The Committee has 
also noted that the tribunals created by the legisl ation shall also have jurisdiction over the institu tions 

engaged in medical disciplines. However, the Department has conceded that no direct consultations with 
regulatory bodies like Medical Council of India and Dental Council of India have been undertaken. The 
Committee can only conclude that consultation proce ss on the proposed Bill has been far from 
satisfactory and the whole exercise seems to be a h urried affair whereby important stakeholders have 
been either ignored or their consent presumed in case of nil response. (Para 2.5)  
  In order to fill the vacuum with respect to consu ltation with the States, the Committee tried to 
facilitate wider consultations by issuing a Press Release on the Bill inviting suggestions from the ge neral 
public. In response, the Committee received memoran da from a good number of 
organizations/individuals on the proposed legislati on. This feedback was circulated amongst the 
members of the Committee and issues raised therein were referred to the Department of Higher 
Education for their response. The Committee hopes that by obtaining the views from diverse groups, the 
consultation process on the Bill has been widened. (Para 2.6)  
CLAUSE 2 
  The Committee is, however, of the view that insti tutions of diversified fields of education both 
under Government and private sector intended to be brought under the jurisdiction of Educational 
Tribunals be clearly specified in Clause 2 so as to  remove any ambiguity and likely complications in 
future.     (Para 3.1)  
CLAUSE 4 
  The Committee is not clear about the status of th e existing State Tribunals in case the State 
Governments do not agree to notify them under the proposed legislation. Further, the Committee has no 
idea as to whether all the provisions regarding the  State Tribunal would be acceptable to the State 
Governments. The Committee is of the view that all ambiguity in this regard needs to be removed at the 
earliest.     (Para 4.2)  
CLAUSES  5 AND 6 
  The Committee believes that it would be practical ly very difficult for a three member Tribunal to 
take up a sizeable number of cases, leave alone the  issue of expeditious disposal thereof. The Committee 
finds the suggestion of Law Commission as practical  and balanced as a five-member State Educational 
Tribunal will prove to be more effective. The Commi ttee is well aware of the fact that these two State  
Educational Tribunals of Orissa and Gujarat cover o nly a very limited aspect of litigation. Nobody can  
also dispute the fact that the proposed legislation  envisages bringing under the purview of tribunals,  
litigation related to all conceivable aspects of hi gher educational institutions with the number of ca ses 
going up by many times that of what obtains at pres ent. In such a scenario, a three member State 
Educational Tribunal will perhaps not prove to effe ctive. The Committee, accordingly, recommends 
setting up of five-member State Education Tribunals. (Para 5.2)  
  Committee’s attention has also been drawn by anot her allied aspect relating to setting up of State 
Educational Tribunals. There are both small and big  States in the country. Not only this, while some o f 
the States have a very large concentration of all c ategories of higher educational institutions, very few 
institutions are there in other States. In such a s cenario, the Committee strongly feels that one 
educational tribunal per State cannot be made unifo rmly applicable across all the States. The 

Committee, therefore, is of the view that this issu e needs to be examined thoroughly and a viable 
mechanism for setting up State Educational Tribunals worked out. (Para 5.3)  
  The Committee does not understand the rationale f or fixing such a minimum age limit. 
Prescribing the minimum age limit to fifty five yea rs could lead to ineligibility of otherwise compete nt 
people. The Supreme Court judgment in the Union of India vs  R. Gandhi, Madras Bar Association 
States that if tribunals are to function efficientl y and effectively, they should be able to attract y ounger 
members who have a reasonable period of service. Th e Committee is of the view that in order to have a 
dynamic system of dispute resolution, youngsters should be engaged in the tribunals and to achieve tha t 
objective, the prescription of minimum age of fifty five years should be revisited. Competent person with 
adequate knowledge and experience, irrespective of his/her age should be considered for making the 
tribunals a successful mechanism for speedy disposal of cases. (Para 5.4)  
CLAUSE 12 
  The Committee would like to draw the attention of  the Department to the recent recommendation 
of the Supreme Court which States that every two-me mber bench of the Tribunal should always have a 
judicial member. Whenever any large or special benc hes are constituted, the number of technical 
members shall not exceed the judicial member. Keepi ng this in view, the Committee finds that Clause 
12(2) violates the judgment of the Supreme Court as  in the event of vacancy of the seat of Chairperson , 
the non-judicial member would chair the bench. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a re-
thinking on the part of the Ministry is required and suitable amendment inserted. (Para 6.3)  
CLAUSE 15(c) 
  The Committee notes that the term ‘Unfair Practic e’ has not been defined in the Bill. The 
Committee believes that without defining the term, ‘unfair practices’, it will be open to interpretation by 
the tribunals and courts. The Committee, therefore,  recommends that the definition of the term ‘unfair  
practices’ as in the aforesaid Bill should be incor porated in the Educational Tribunals Bills, 2010 in  the 
form of a definition to avoid any confusion. (Para 7.1)  
CLAUSE 21 
  The Committee expresses its reservations about th e representation of as many as three 
Secretaries/ex-Secretaries to Government of India/e quivalent rank in the National Tribunal. The 
Committee believes that this may lead to bureaucrat ization of the tribunal. Further, as Secretary leve l 
officers remain highly preoccupied with their assig nments, their availability for sittings of National  
Educational Tribunal may not be so easy. These issu es need to be kept in mind and the composition of 
National Educational Tribunal may be reviewed accordingly. (Para 8.3)  
CLAUSE 23 
  The Committee is not convinced by the justificati on given by the Department. It believes that the 
composition of the Selection Committee should be a balanced one as it would be appointing the 
Chairperson and members of the National Tribunals w ho would be discharging an important task of 
adjudicating on disputes primarily related to educa tional matters. Therefore, adequate representation 
of the academia should be ensured in the Selection Committee so that the basic spirit behind the 
proposed legislation is not defeated. (Para 9.2)  

CLAUSE 51 
  The Committee agrees with the stand taken by the Ministry as the service matters, disciplinary 
matters etc. of the minority institutions would definitely fall under the proposed Bill and this in any way 
would not contravene the NCMEI Act. A dispute betwe en a minority educational institution and a 
statutory regulatory body, arising not due to the m inority character of the institution would not come  
under the purview of the Commission. (Para 10.1)  
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 
  The Committee is, therefore, of the view that Gov ernment needs to identify the lacunae and 
weaknesses of existing tribunals system and then ad dress them in the right perspective. The Committee 
would also like to emphasize that the orders of the  Tribunals should have some force so that they are 
complied with within a specified period of time. (Para 11.1)  
  The Committee hopes that the tribunals as propose d under the Bill do not in any way hinder the 
quality, innovation and creativity in higher education and are able to deliver their mandate efficiently. 
       (Para 11.2)  
  The Committee is of the opinion that the provisio n regarding setting up of National Educational 
Tribunal is within the judicial verdict as in Chand ra Mohan’s case. Regarding the setting up of 
Educational Division, the Committee is of the view that since the Government is implementing the 
Commercial dispute bench for the first time, it can consider formation of such benches by increasing the 
number of High Court judges and Supreme Court judges whenever it plans to abolish the tribunals.  
       (Para 11.3)  
  The Committee is also apprehensive that due to th e complex structure of the tribunals, a greater 
level of litigation may be encouraged. Also, some o f the procedures under the proposed Bill may lead t o 
delays in the delivery of speedy justice. The Depar tment has, however, clarified that the tribunals ar e 
expected to deliver fast-track conclusive adjudication and hence provision for interim orders may not be 
necessary. The Committee hopes that these tribunals  would be successful in discharging their mandate 
for a fast-track speedy justice to all the litigant s. The Committee feels that in a democracy there is  
always some scope for improvement in the administra tion system and, therefore, efforts to simplify the  
complex procedures should continue for a more easier and faster resolution of disputes. (Para 11.4)  
  The Committee believes that before setting up tri bunals, the magnitude of cases and costs incurred 
in litigation should be assessed. The Committee is of the view that if the tribunals proposed to be 
established serve their desired purpose and ease of f tbe pressure from the courts, expenditure on them  
would be justified. However, if they do not serve t he desired purpose, the Ministry should keep in min d 
the extent of wasteful expenditure on the same. The  Committee recommends for fixing minimum court 
fee in case of tribunals as well which could consolidate the financial viability thereof. (Para 11.5)  
  The Committee feels that a view can be taken for setting up of district level Tribunals in the 230 
districts having higher concentration of educationa l institutions. The other alternative in Committee’ s 
view can be to have one district level Tribunal for  2-3 districts based on the number of institutions in 
these districts. The Committee would also like to d raw the attention of the Ministry to the fact that 
Supreme Court in T.M. Pai Judgement while recommend ing district level Tribunals had suggested that 
the district Tribunals can hold circuit/camp sittin gs in different districts. The Committee would 

appreciate if the viability of all alternatives can be assessed and required action taken accordingly.  
       (Para 11.7)  
  The Committee believes that the students are the soul of an institution and their interests should 
be protected and taken care of. This could only be made possible by including the word ‘students’ in the 
substantive clause. The Committee is not convinced by the Ministry’s justification as there is no harm in 
including the word ‘students’ in the Bill and makin g it apparently clear for the students themselves s o 
that they can seek justice and safeguard their interests. (Para 11.8)  
  The Committee wonders as to how the tribunals wou ld deliver justice in respect of public and 
private institutions with different policies. They would have to devise separate mechanism for private  
institutions based on the principle of natural just ice. Same yardstick for both public and private 
institutions would not work out well as it will giv e rise to various litigations and also dampen the 
innovative mechanisms followed by private institutions. The Committee hopes that this may be clarified 
in the proposed Bill.   (Para 11.9)  
 The Committee is of the view that interests of SCs  & STs should be protected and due 
representation given to them.         (Para 11.10)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA  
Bill No. 55 of 2010  
THE EDUCATIONAL TRIBUNALS BILL, 2010  
——— 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
——— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
Clauses 
 1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
 2. Applicability of Act. 
 3. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
S
TATE EDUCATIONAL TRIBUNALS  
 4. Establishment of State Educational Tribunal. 
 5. Composition of State Educational Tribunal. 
 6. Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson o r Member of State Educational Tribunal.  
 7. Selection Committee. 
 8. Term of office, salaries and allowances of Chai rperson and Members of State Educational Tribunal 
 9. Resignation. 
 10. Removal and suspension of Chairperson and Memb ers of State Educational Tribunal.  
 11. Vacancies. 
 12. Member of State Educational Tribunal to act as  its Chairperson in certain cases. 
 13. Prohibitions as to holding of offices by Chair person or Member on ceasing to be such Chairperson or 
Member of State Educational Tribunal. 
 14. Staff of State Educational Tribunal and their salaries and allowances. 
 15. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of State Ed ucational Tribunal.  
 16. Manner of making application before State Educ ational Tribunal. 
 17.  Applications not to be admitted unless other remedies exhausted.  
 18.  Limitation. 

 19.  Filing of appeal to National Educational Trib unal. 
CHAPTER III 
NATIONAL EDUCATIONAL TRIBUNAL 
 20. Establishment of National Educational Tribunal .  
 21. Composition of National Educational Tribunal. 
 22.  Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson  or Member of National Educational Tribunal. 
 23.  Selection Committee. 
 24.  Term of office, salaries and allowances of Ch airperson and Members of National Educational Tribunal. 
 25.  Resignation. 
Clauses 
 26. Removal and suspension of Chairperson and Memb ers of National Educational Tribunal. 
 27.  Vacancies. 
 28.  Member of National Educational Tribunal to ac t as its Chairperson in certain cases. 
 29.  Prohibition as to holding of offices by Chair person or Member on ceasing to he such Chairperson or 
Member of National Educational Tribunal 
 30.  Staff of National Educational Tribunal and th eir salaries and allowances. 
 31. Powers and authority of National Educational T ribunal. 
 32. Filing of application for adjudication of disp ute by National Educational Tribunal. 
 33. Applications not to be admitted unless other r emedies exhausted.  
 34.  Limitation. 
 35. Appeal against order passed under this Chapter  
CHAPTER IV 
P
ENALTIES  
 36.  Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Tribunal.  
 37.  Execution of award or order of Tribunal. 
 38.  Cognizance of offence. 
CHAPTER V 
M
ISCELLANEOUS  
 39.  Procedure of State Educational Tribunals and National Educational Tribunal. 
 40.  Interim orders. 
 41.  Proceedings before Tribunal to be judicial pr oceedings. 

 42.  Vacancy in State Educational Tribunals or Nat ional Educational Tribunal not to invalidate acts o r 
proceedings. 
 43.  Members and staff of Tribunals to be public s ervants  
 44. Administrative control. 
 45.  Dismissal of frivolous or vexatious complaint s.  
 46.  Finality of orders. 
 47.  Exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts.  
 48.  Protection of action taken in good faith.  
 49.  Act to have overriding effect 
 50.  Application of other laws not barred. 
 51.  Non-applicability of this Act to minority ins titutions in certain cases. 
 52. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
 53.  Power of State Government to make rules. 
 54.  Rules to be laid before Parliament and State Legislature. 
 55.  Power to remove difficulties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 55 of 2010 
 
THE EDUCATIONAL TRIBUNALS BILL, 2010  
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of Educational Tri bunals for effective and expeditions adjudication o f 
disputes involving teachers and other employees of higher educational institutions and other stake hol ders 
(including students, universities, institutions and  statutory regulatory authorities) and to adjudicat e penalties 
for indulging in unfair practices in higher education and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:---- 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
 
 1.   ( 1) This Act may be called the Educational Tribunals Act, 2010. 
 ( 2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
 ( 3) It shall come into force on such date or dates as  the Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint: and different dates may be 
appointed for different States and any reference in  any provision of 
this Act to the commencement of this Act shall be c onstrued in 
relation to any State or part thereof as a referenc e to the coming into 
force of that provision in that State or part thereof. 
2.   This Act shall apply to all higher educational in stitution other 
Short title extent and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Application of Act 

than the higher educational institutions engaged mainly in agricultural 
education and research. 
3.   ( 1) In this Act. unless the context otherwise requires.–   
 ( a) “Academic Member” means a Member appointed as suc h 
under sub-section ( 2) of section 22; 
 ( b) “Administrative Member” means a Member appointed as such 
under sub-section ( 3) of section 22;  
 ( c) “affiliation” together with its grammatical variations, includes, 
in relation to a college or institution.– 
 ( i) recognition of such college or institution by a university; or 
 ( ii ) association of such college or institution with a university; or 
 ( iii ) admission of such college or institution to the p rivileges of a 
university; 
 ( d) “appropriate Government”.- 
 ( i) in relation to a Union territory, means the Central Government; 
 ( ii ) in relation to a State, means the Government of t he State in 
which the State Educational Tribunal is established under this Act; 
 ( e) “appropriate State Legislature” means such Legisl ature of the 
State as has jurisdiction over the matter; 
 ( f) “appropriate statutory regulatory authority” mean ’ any 
authority established under any law for the time be ing in force for co-
ordinating or determining or maintaining the standa rds of higher 
education and research; 
 ( g) “Central Educational Institution” means---- 
 ( i) a university established or incorporated by or un der a Central 
Act; or 
 ( ii ) an institution of national importance set up by a n Act of 
Parliament; or 
 ( iii ) an institution, declared as an institution deemed  to be 
University under section 3 of the University Grants  Commission Act, 
1956, and maintained by, or receiving aid from the Central 
Government; or 
 ( iv ) an institution maintained by, or receiving aid from.– 
 ( A)  the Central Government, whether directly or indirectly; 
 ( B) affiliated to university referred to in sub-claus e (i) or to an 
institution referred to in sub-clause (ii); or a co nstituent  unit  of  an  
 
 
 
Definitions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

institution  referred  to  in 
sub-clause (iii); 
 (v) a higher educational institution set up by the  Central 
Government under the Societies Registration Act, 1960;  
 ( h) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of a State Ed ucational 
Tribunal or the National Educational Tribunal, as the case may be; 
 ( i) “college” means any institution, whether known as  such or by 
any other name which provides for a course of study for obtaining any 
qualification from a university and which, in accor dance with the 
rules and regulations of such university, is recognised as competent to 
provide for such course of study and present students undergoing such 
course of study for examination for the award of such qualification; 
 ( j) “contractual provisions” in relation to a teacher or an employee 
engaged on contract by an high educational institut ion means the 
provisions of the terms and conditions of the contr act governing the 
service of such teacher or employee to such institution; 
 ( k) “degree” means any such degree, as may, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, be specified in this behalf by the 
University Grants Commission by notification in the  Official Gazette, 
under section 22 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956; 
 ( l) “diploma” means such award, not being a degree, g ranted by 
a higher educational institution certifying that th e recipient has 
successfully completed a course of study of not les s than nine months 
duration; 
 ( m) “distance education systems” means the distance e ducation 
systems as defined in clause ( e) of section ( 2) of the Indira Gandhi 
National Open University Act, 1985; 
 ( n) “High Court” means the High Court of the State wi thin 
whose jurisdiction the State Educational Tribunal is situated; 
 ( o) “higher educational institution” means an institu tion of 
learning including an university, an institution de emed to be 
university, a college, an institute, an institution of national importance 
declared as such by an Act of Parliament or a const ituent unit of such 
institution, which is imparting (whether through co nduct of regular 
classes or distance education system) higher educat ion beyond twelve 
years of schooling leading to the award of a degree or diploma; 
 ( p) “institution deemed to be University” means an in stitution 
declared by the Central Government, as deemed to be  a university 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

under section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956; 
 ( q) “Judicial Member” means a Member appointed as suc h 
under sub-section ( 1) of section 22 and includes the Chairperson; 
 ( r) “Member” includes the Chairperson and a Member of  the 
National Educational Tribunal or a State Educationa l Tribunal, as the 
case may be; 
 ( s) “National Educational Tribunal” means the Nationa l 
Educational Tribunal established under section 20; 
 ( t) “notification” means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette and the expression “notify” with its cognot e meanings and 
grammatical variations shall be construed accordingly; 
 ( u) “prescribed” means prescribed rules made by the a ppropriate 
Government of the Central Government, as the case m ay be, under 
this Act; 
 ( v) “service” means service with an higher educationa l 
institution; 
 ( w) “service matters”, in relation to a teacher or an  employee of 
a higher educational institution means all matters relating to the 
conditions of their service as respects.– 
 ( i) remuneration including pay, allowances, pension a nd other 
retirement benefits permissible in accordance with the terms and 
conditions of service of such teacher of employee; 
 ( ii ) tenure including appointment, probation, confirma tion, 
seniority promotion, reversion, premature retiremen t or 
superannuation; 
 ( iii )  Leave of any kind; 
 ( iv )  Disciplinary matters; or 
 ( v)  Any other matter whatsoever; 
 ( x) “service rules” means the rules or regulations or  statutes or 
bye-laws or ordinances or contractual provisions, a s the case may be, 
of the higher educational institution, governing service matters, of any 
teacher or any employee (whether appointed on perma nent or 
temporary or visiting or contract basis) of such institution; 
 ( y) “society” means a society registered under the So cieties 
Registration Act, 1860 or under any corresponding l aw for the time 
being in force in a State; 
 ( z) “State Educational Tribunal” means a State Educat ional 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Tribunal established in a State under section 4; 
 ( za ) “Vice Chancellor” means – 
 (i) Chief executive or a university; or 
 ( ii ) head of a Central Educational Institution, not leaving a college 
 (2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but 
defined in the University Grants Commission Act, 19 56 and not 
inconsistent with this Act shall have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
S
TATE EDUCATIONAL TRIBUNALS  
4.  The appropriate Government shall, by notification,  establish a 
Tribunal to be known as the “State Educational Trib unal” to exercise 
the powers conferred upon it under this Act: 
 Provided that an appropriate Government may notify  any 
Educational Tribunal existing before the commenceme nt of this Act 
as the “State Educational Tribunal” for the purpose s of this Act and 
thereafter the provisions of this Act shall apply to such Tribunal. 
5.   Each State Educational Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson 
and two other Members of which not less than one sh all be a woman 
to be appointed  by  the appropriate Government. 
6.  ( 1) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as th e Chairperson 
of a State Educational Tribunal, if such person is, or has been, a Judge 
of the  High Court: 
 Provided that no appointment under this section sh all be 
consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court. 
 ( 2) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as a Member of 
Tribunal, if such person:  – 
 ( a) is not less than fifty-five years of age; 
 ( b) is of ability, integrity and standing, and has ad equate 
knowledge and experience of at least twenty years i n dealing with 
matters relating to higher education, public affairs or administration in 
educational matters; 
 ( c) is or has been, a Vice Chancellor or a person Who  is or has 
been of the rank and equivalence of a Chief Secreta ry of the State 
Government; 
 ( 3) Our of the two Members referred to in sub-section  (/) of 
section 5, one Members shall be chosen from amongst  persons who is 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Establishment of State 
Educational Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
Composition  of State Educational 
Tribunal. 
 
 
Qualifications for appointment as 
Chairperson or Member of State 
Educational Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

or has been the Vice Chancellor and the other Member shall be chosen 
from amongst persons who is or has been, the Chief Secretary of the 
State Government or equivalent rank. 
7.  ( 1) The Chairperson and Members of the State Educatio nal 
Tribunal shall be appointed by the appropriate Gove rnment  from a 
panel of names recommended  by a Selection  Committ ee consisting 
of– 
 ( a) the Chief Justice of the High Court or his nomine e ................. 
Chairperson; 
 ( b) the Chief Secretary of the State Government ….……… …… 
Member; 
 ( c) an officer of the State Government of the rank and equivalence 
of a Secretary to the Government of India with expe rience in dealing 
with educational matters ..............  Member. 
 ( 2) The Secretary-in charge of higher education in the Department 
of  Education or Department dealing with educationa l matters of the 
State Government shall be the convenor of the meeti ngs of the  
Selection Committee. 
 ( 3) The term of the Selection Committee and the manne r of 
selection of panel of names shall be such as may be  prescribed by the 
appropriate Government: 
 Provided that in the case of the Selection Committ ee in respect of 
an Educational Tribunal to be established in a Unio n territory, the 
provisions of this section shall have the effect as  if for the Word 
"State Government" the Words “Central Government” h as been 
substituted. 
 ( 4) No appointment of the Chairperson or Member of th e State 
Educational Tribunal shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy 
in the Selection Committee, 
 ( 5) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections ( 1) to ( 4) the 
Selection Committee may regulate its own procedure. 
8.  ( 1) The Chairperson and every Member of the State Edu cational 
Tribunal shall hold office as such for a term of fi ve years from the 
date on which he enters upon his office and shall b e eligible for 
reappointment: 
 Provided that the Chairperson or other Members of the State 
Educational Tribunal shall  not hold  office as suc h after he has 
attained the age of seventy years. 
 ( 2) The salaries and allowances payable to and the ot her terms 
 
 
 
 
 
Selection Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Term of office, salaries and 
allowances of Chairperson and 
Members of State Educational 
Tri-bunal. 
 
 
 
 

and conditions of service of the Chairperson and ot her Members of a 
State Educational Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
appropriate Government: 
  Provided that neither the salary and allowances n or the other 
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Member 
shall be varied to their disadvantage alter their appointment. 
9.   The Chairperson or a Member of the State Educatio nal Tribunal 
may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the appropriate 
Government resign his office: 
 Provided that the Chairperson or a Member of the S tate 
Educational Tribunal shall, unless he is permitted by the appropriate 
Government to relinquish his office sooner continue  to hold office 
until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice 
or until a person duly appointed as his successor e nters upon office or 
until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest. 
10.  ( 1) The appropriate Government may, in consultation w ith the 
Chief Justice of the High Court, remove from  offic e the Chairperson 
or any other Member of the State Educational Tribunal who— 
 ( a) has been adjudged an insolvent: or 
 ( b) has engaged at any time during his term of office  in any paid 
employment: or 
 ( c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the op inion of the 
Central Government involves moral turpitude; or 
 ( d) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such 
Chairperson or other Member; or 
 ( e) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a co mpetent 
court: or 
 ( f) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to 
affect prejudicially the exercise of his functions as such Chairperson 
or other Member: or 
 ( g) has so abused his position as to render his conti nuance in 
office prejudicial to the public interest: or 
 ( h) has been guilty of proved misbehavior: or 
 ( i) has such other disqualifications as may be prescr ibed by the 
appropriate Government. 
 ( 2) “Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sectio n ( 1) no 
Chairperson or a Member of the State Educational Tr ibunal shall be 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resignation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Removal and suspension of 
Chairperson and Members of 
State Educational Tri-bunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

removed from his office on the grounds specified in  clause ( f) or 
clause ( g) or clause ( h) of sub-section ( i), except by an order made by 
the appropriate Government after an inquiry made in  this be shall  by 
a Judge of the High Court in which such Chairperson or such Member 
has been informed of the charges against him and gi ven a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges. 
 ( 3) The appropriate Government may, by rules, regulat e the 
procedure for the inquiry referred to in sub-section ( 2). 
11.  If  for any reason other  than temporary absence, any vacancy  
occurs in the office of the Chairperson or a  Membe r of the State 
Educational Tribunal, the appropriate Government sh all appoint 
another person in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the 
vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before  the State 
Educational Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled. 
12.  ( 1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of 
the Chairperson of the State Educational Tribunal b y reason of his 
death or resignation, the senior-most Member of the State Educational 
Tribunal shall act as the Chairperson of the Tribun al until the date on 
which a new chairperson appointed in accordance wit h the provisions 
of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office. 
 ( 2) When the Chairperson of the State Educational Tri bunal is 
unable to discharge his functions owing to absence,  illness or any 
other cause, the senior-most Member shall discharge  the functions of  
the Chairperson until the date on which the Chairpe rson resumes his 
duties. 
13.   On ceasing to hold office.– 
 ( a) the Chairperson or Member of the State Education Tribunal as 
the case may be, shall, subject to the provisions o f this Act, be 
ineligible, for a period of five years from  the da te on which they 
cease to hold office, for further employment (inclu ding as consultant 
or expert or otherwise) in any higher educational i nstitution within 
such State, whether under the Central Government or  the  
Government of any State or any private educational institution or in 
any institution whose matters had been before such Chairperson or 
Member; 
 ( b) the Chairperson or Member shall not appear, act o r  plead 
before the State Educational Tribunal in which he h ad been the 
Chairperson or Member. 
14.   (1) The appropriate Government shall, after consultations with the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vacancies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Members of State Educational 
Tribunal to act as its Chairperson 
in certain cases. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prohibitions as to holding of 
offices by Chairperson or Member 
on ceasing to be such Chair-
person or Member of State 
Educational Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Staff of State Educational 
Tribunal and their salaries and 

Chairperson of the State Educational Tribunal, dete rmine the nature 
and categories of the officers und other employees required to assist 
the State Educational Tribunal in the discharge of its  functions and 
provide such Tribunal with such officers and other employees as it 
may think fit. 
 ( 2) The officers and other employees of the State Edu cational 
Tribunal shall discharge their functions under the general 
superintendence of the Chairperson of such Tribunal. 
 ( 3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the o ther terms  
and conditions of  service of the officers and othe r employees of a 
State Educational Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
appropriate Government. 
 15.  Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the State 
Educational Tribunal shall exercise powers and auth ority in relation 
to,– 
 ( a) service matters of any teacher or any other emplo yee of a 
higher educational institution; 
 ( b) matters relating to affiliation of any higher edu cation 
institution (not being University) with the affiliating University; 
 ( c) matters relating to use of unfair practices, by a ny higher 
educational institution which has been  specificall y prohibited, under 
any law for the time being in  force; 
 ( d) matters as may be assigned to it by any other law  for the time 
being in  force. 
16.  Every application, for redressal of grievance or s ettlement of 
disputes relating to any of the  matters specified under clauses ( a) to 
(d) of section 15, shall be made to the Educational T ribunal in such 
form and accompanied by such documents and on payme nt of such 
fee and the manner as may be prescribed by the appr opriate 
Government. 
17.  ( 1) The State Educational  Tribunal shall not admit a ny 
applications in respect of a matter under clause (a ) of section 15 
unless it is satisfied that the applicant had avail ed of all the remedies 
available to him under the relevant service rules f or redressal of 
grievances or settlement of disputes,– 
 ( 2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), a person shall be deemed 
to have availed of all the remedies available to hi m under the relevant 
service rules or contractual provisions as to Redressal of grievances or 
settlement of disputes,– 
allowances. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jurisdiction, powers and authority 
of State Educational Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Manner of making application 
before State Educational Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Applications not to be admitted 
unless other remedies exhausted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 ( a) if a final order has been made by the higher educ ational 
institution or other authority or officer or other person competent to 
pass such order under such rules, rejecting any app eal preferred or 
representation made by such person in connection wi th the grievance 
or disputes; or 
 ( b) where no final order has been made by the higher educational 
institution or other authority or officer or other person competent to 
pass such order with regard to the application repr esentation made or 
appeal preferred by such person, if a period of thr ee months from the 
date on which such application or representation wa s made or  appeal 
was preferred has expired; or 
 ( c) where no service rules exist on the service matter in dispute. 
 Explanation. – For the purposes of this section, the words “fina l 
order” means an order passed by such final appellat e authority  of the 
higher educational institution as provided in the service rules but does 
not include an order passed in any arbitration or a ny conciliation 
proceedings under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. 
18.  ( 1) A State Educational Tribunal shall not admit an application.– 
 ( a) in a case where a final order referred to in clau se ( a) of sub-
section ( 2) of section 17 has been made, unless the applicati on is 
made, within a period of six months from the date o n  which such 
final order has been made; 
 ( b) in a case where an appeal or representation such as is 
mentioned in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) of section 17 has been made 
and a period of three months had expired thereafter  without such final 
order having been made, within a period of six mont hs from the date 
of expiry of the said period of three months; 
 ( c) in any other matter, within a period of six month s from the 
date the cause of  action arose. 
 ( 2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this sectio n an 
application may be admitted after the period of six  months specified 
in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of this section, if the applicant 
satisfies the Stare Educational Tribunal that he had sufficient cause for 
not making the application within such period. 
19.   Any person aggrieved by an order made by a State Educational 
Tribunal in respect of any matter specified under c lauses ( b) to ( d) of 
section 15, may prefer an appeal against such order  to the National 
Educational Tribunal within a period of sixty days from the date of the 
order, in such form and manner and accompanied with  such 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Limitation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Filing of appeal to National 
Educational Tribunal. 
 
 

documents and such fees as may be prescribed by the  Central 
Government: 
 Provided that the National Educational Tribunal ma y entertain an 
appeal after the expiry of the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied 
that the appellant had sufficient cause for not pre ferring the appeal 
within the said period. 
CHAPTER III 
N
ATIONAL EDUCATIONAL TRIBUNAL  
20.  The Central Government shall, by notification,  establish a 
Tribunal to be known as the “National Educational T ribunal’’ to 
exercise the powers conferred upon it under this Act.  
21.   (1) The National Educational Tribunal shall consist o f a 
Chairperson and such number of Members not exceedin g eight to be 
appointed by the Central Government.  
 ( 2) Out of the eight Members to be appointed under su b-section 
(1) – 
 ( a) two shall be Judicial Members; 
 ( b) three shall be Academic Members; 
 ( c) three shall be Administrative Members. 
 ( 3) Not less than one-third of the total number of Me mber’s 
appointed under sub-section ( 1) shall be women. 
 ( 4) Subject to the provisions of this Act,– 
 ( a) the jurisdiction of the National Educational Trib unal may be 
exercised by Benches thereof; 
 ( b) a Bench may be constituted by the Chairperson con sisting of 
three Members  of which one Member shall be a Judic ial Member, 
one  Member shall be an Academic Member and one Member shall be 
an Administrative Member. 
 ( 5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  ( 4), the 
Chairperson may transfer a Member from one Bench to  another 
Bench. 
 ( 6) The National Educational Tribunal shall sit in New Delhi. 
22.  (1) A  person shall be qualified to be appointed as the Chairperson 
or Judicial Member of the National Educational Trib unal, if such 
person is, or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Establishment of National 
Educational Tribunal. 
 
 
Composition of National 
Educational Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Qualifications for appointment as 
Chairperson or Member of 
National Educational Tri-bunal. 
 

 Provided that no appointment under this sub-sectio n shall be 
made except after consultation with the Chief Justice of India. 
 ( 2) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as an  Academic  
Member of the National Educational Tribunal if such person,– 
 ( a) is not less than fifty-five years of age; 
 ( b) is of ability, integrity and standing, and has ad equate 
knowledge and experience of at least twenty-five years in dealing with 
matters relating to higher education or administrat ion in educational 
matters; 
 ( c) is, or has been, a Vice Chancellor of any Univers ity, or a 
Director of an institution of national importance. 
 ( 3) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as an  
Administrative Member of the National Educational T ribunal if such 
person,– 
 ( a) is not less than fifty-five years of age; 
 ( b) is of ability, integrity and standing, and has ad equate 
knowledge and experience of at least twenty-five years in dealing with 
matters relating to higher education, public affairs or administration in 
educational matters; 
 ( c) is, or has been, a Secretary to the Government of  India or 
equivalent rank. 
23.   (1) The Chairperson and Members of the National Educa tional 
Tribunal shall be appointed by the Central Governme nt from a panel 
of names recommended by a Selection Committee consisting of– 
 ( a) the Chief Justice of India or his nominee ............ Chairperson; 
 ( b) the Secretary in charge of higher education in th e Ministry of 
Human Resource Development of the Government of Ind ia ........ 
 Member; 
 ( c) the Secretary in the Ministry of Law and Justice of the 
Government of India .......... Member; 
 ( d) the Secretary in charge of medical education in the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare of the Government of Indi a ............ 
Member; 
 ( e) the Secretary in charge of the Department of Pers onnel and 
Training of the Government of India .......... Member. 
 ( 2) The Secretary in charge of higher education in th e Ministry of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Selection Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Human Resource Development of the Government of Ind ia shall be 
the convenor of the meetings of the Selection Committee. 
 ( 3) The term of the Selection Committee and the manne r of 
selection of panel of names shall be such as may be  prescribed by the 
Central Government. 
 ( 4)  No appointment of the Chairperson or Member of t he 
National Educational Tribunal shall be invalid mere ly by reason of 
any vacancy in the Selection Committee. 
 ( 5) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections ( 1) to ( 4), the 
Selection Committee may regulate its own procedure. 
24.  ( 1) The Chairperson and every other Member of the Nat ional 
Educational Tribunal shall, hold office as, such fo r a term of five 
years from the date on which he enters upon his off ice and shall be 
eligible for reappointment: 
 Provided that the Chairperson or other Member of t he National 
Educational Tribunal shall not hold office as such after he has attained 
the age of seventy years. 
 ( 2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the o ther terms 
and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and o ther Members of 
the National Educational Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government: 
 Provided that neither the salary and allowances no r the other 
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Member 
shall be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment. 
25.   The Chairperson or a Member of the National Educa tional 
Tribunal may, by notice in writing under his hand a ddressed to the 
Central Government, resign his office: 
 Provided that the Chairperson or a Member of the N ational 
Educational Tribunal shall, unless he is permitted by the Central 
Government to relinquish his office sooner, continu e to hold office 
until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice 
or until a person duly appointed as his successor e nters upon office or 
until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest. 
26.  ( 1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Chief 
Justice of India, remove from office, the Chairpers on or any other 
Member of the National Educational Tribunal, who– 
 ( a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or 
 ( b) has engaged any time, during his term of office, in any paid 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Term of office, salaries and allo-
wances of Chair-person and 
Members of National Educa-
tional Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resignation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Removal and suspension of 
Chairperson and Members of 
National Educational Tribunal. 
 
 
 

employment; or  
 ( c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the op inion of the 
Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or 
 ( d) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such 
Chairperson or other Member; or 
 ( e) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a co mpetent 
court; or  
 ( f) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to 
affect prejudicially the exercise of his functions as such Chairperson 
or other Member; or 
 ( g) has so abused his position as to render his conti nuance in 
office prejudicial to the public interest; or 
 ( h) has been guilty of proved misbehaviour; or 
 ( i) has such other disqualifications as may be prescr ibed. 
 ( 2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section ( 1), no Chairperson 
or a Member of the National Educational Tribunal sh all be removed 
from his office on the grounds specified in clause ( f) or clause ( g) or 
clause ( h) of sub-section ( 1) except by an order made by the Central 
Government after an inquiry made in this behalf by a Judge of the 
Supreme Court in which such Chairperson or such Mem ber has been 
informed of the charge against him and given a reas onable 
opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges. 
 ( 3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate th e 
procedure for the inquiry referred to in sub-section ( 2). 
27.  If, for any reason other than temporary absence, a ny vacancy 
occurs in the office of the Chairperson or a Member  of the National 
Educational Tribunal, the Central Government shall appoint another 
person in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy 
and the proceedings may be continued before the Nat ional 
Educational Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled. 
28.   (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of 
the Chairperson of the National Educational Tribunal by reason of his 
death or resignation, the senior-most Member of the  National 
Educational Tribunal shall act as the Chairperson of the Tribunal until 
the date on which a new Chairperson, appointed in a ccordance with 
the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office. 
 ( 2) When the Chairperson of the National Educational Tribunal 
is unable to discharge his functions owing to absen ce, illness or any 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vacancies. 
 
 
 
 
 
Members of National Educational 
Tribunal to act as its Chairperson 
in certain cases. 
 
 
 
 

other cause, the senior-most Member of the National  Educational 
Tribunal, shall discharge the functions of the Chai rperson until the 
date on which the Chairperson resumes his duties. 
29.  On ceasing to hold office,– 
 ( a) the Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, of  the 
National Educational Tribunal shall, subject to the  provisions of this 
Act, be ineligible, for a period of five years from  the date they cease 
to hold office, for further employment (including a s consultant or 
expert or otherwise) in any higher educational inst itution, whether 
under the Central Government or the Government of a ny State or any 
private educational institution or in any instituti on whose matters had 
been before such Chairperson or Member; and 
 ( b) the Chairperson or Member shall not  appear,  act  or  plead 
before the National Educational Tribunal or the Sta te Educational 
Tribunal. 
30.   (1) The Central Government shall, after consultation with the 
Chairperson of the National Educational Tribunal de termine the 
nature and categories of the officers and other emp loyees required to 
assist the National Educational Tribunal  in the di scharge of its 
functions and provide such  Tribunal with such offi cers and other 
employees as it may think fit. 
 ( 2) The officers and other employees of the  National  
Educational Tribunal shall discharge their functions under the general 
superintendence of the Chairperson of such Tribunal. 
 ( 3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and  the other terms 
and conditions  of  service  of the officers and ot her employees of the 
National  Educational Tribunal shall be such as may  be prescribed by 
the Central Government. 
31.  ( 1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act,  the 
National Educational Tribunal shall exercise power and authority in 
relation to– 
 ( a) any dispute between any higher educational instit ution and 
appropriate  statutory regulatory authority; 
 ( b) any reference made to it by any appropriate statu tory 
regulatory authority amongst statutory regulatory authorities; 
 ( c) any matter of affiliation between any higher educ ational 
institution (other than a University) and the affil iating University. 
Where such University is a Central Educational Inst itution having 
powers of  affiliation in two or more States; 
 
 
 
Prohibition as to holding of 
offices by Chairperson or Member 
on ceasing to be such Chairperson 
or Member of National 
Educational Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Staff of National Educational 
Tribunal and their salaries and 
allowances. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Powers and authority of National 
Educational Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 ( d) any constituent unit of an institution deemed to be University 
or a Central Educational institution located in a S tate other than the 
State in which such Institution deemed to be univer sity or a Central 
Educational Institution is located: 
 ( e) on the matters as may be assigned to it by any ot her law for 
the time being in force. 
 ( 2) The National Educational Tribunal shall exercise appellate 
jurisdiction as provided in section 19 over a matter under clause ( b) to 
(d) of section 15 decided by any State Educational Tribunal.  
 ( 3) The National Educational Tribunal shall have the power to 
call for the records and pass appropriate orders in  any matter which is 
pending before or has been decided by any State Edu cational 
Tribunal. where it appears to the National Educatio nal Tribunal that 
such State Educational Tribunal has exercised juris diction not vested 
in it by law or has failed to exercise a  jurisdict ion so vested or has 
acted in exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material 
irregularity. 
 ( 4) Where cases involving the same or substantially t he same 
issues, to the satisfaction of the National Educati onal Tribunal. either 
on its own motion or on an application made by a pa rty to any such 
case. are pending before the National Educational Tribunal and one or 
more State Educational Tribunals, or before two mor e State 
Educational, Tribunals. the National Educational Tr ibunal may 
withdraw the case or cases pending before the State  Educational 
Tribunal or the State Educational. Tribunals and di spose of all the 
cases itself. 
 Provided that the National Educational Tribunal ma y, after 
determining the said issues return any case so with drawn together 
with a copy of its order on such questions to the S tate Educational 
Tribunal from which the case has been withdrawn and  the State 
Educational Tribunal shall on receipt thereof, proc eed to dispose of 
the case in conformity with such order. 
32.  Any person. for settlement of any dispute arising out of matters 
referred to in clause ( a) or in clause ( b) or in clause ( c) or in clause ( d) 
or clause ( e) of sub- section ( 1) of section 31 may make an 
application. in such from and accompanied by such documents and on 
payment of such fee and the manner as may be prescr ibed by the 
Central Government. within a period of six months f rom the date 
when such dispute first arose: 
 Provided that the National Educational Tribunal ma y entertain an 
appeal or application after the expiry of the said period of six months. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Filing of application for 
adjudication of dispute by 
National Educational Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficien t cause for not 
preferring the appeal within the said period. 
33.  ( 1) The National Educational Tribunal shall, not admi t an 
application in respect of a service matter of any t eacher or any other 
employee of the Constituent Unit or any Institution  deemed to be a 
University or Central Educational  Institution  referred to in clause ( d) 
of section 31 unless it is satisfied that the appli cant had availed of all 
the remedies available to him under the relevant se rvice rules for 
redressal of grievances. 
 ( 2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), a person shall be deemed 
to have availed of all the remedies available to hi m under the relevant 
service rules as to redressal of grievances.– 
 ( a) if a final order has been made by the higher educ ational 
institution or other authority or officer or other person competent to 
pass such order under such rules rejecting any appe al preferred or 
representation made by such person in connection wi th the grievance; 
or 
 ( b) where no final order has been made by the higher educational 
institution or other authority or officer or other person competent to 
pass such order with regard to the application or r epresentation made 
or appeal preferred by such person. if a period of three months from 
the date on which such application or representatio n was made or 
appeal was preferred was made has expired; or 
 ( c) where no service rules exist on the service matters raised: 
 Explanation .----For the purposes of this section, the words "f inal 
order" means an order passed by such final appellat e authority of the 
higher educational institution as  provided in the service rules but does 
not include an order passed in any arbitration or a ny conciliation 
proceedings under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996. 
34.   (1) A National Educational Tribunal shall not admit a n 
application.---- 
 ( a) in a case where a final order referred to in clau se ( c) of sub-
section ( 2) of section 33 has been made. unless the applicati on is 
made, within a period of six months from the date on which such final 
order has been made; 
 ( b) in a case where an appeal or representation such as is 
mentioned in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) of section 33 has been made 
and a period of three months had expired thereafter  without such final 
order having been made within a period of six month s from the date 
 
 
 
Applications not to be admitted 
unless other remedies exhausted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Limitation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

of expiry of the said period of three months; 
 ( c) in any other matter within a period of six months from the date 
the cause of action arose. 
 ( 2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this sectio n, an 
application may be admitted after the period of six  months specified 
in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of this section, if the applicant 
satisfies the National Educational Tribunal that he had sufficient cause 
for not making the application within such period. 
35.  Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Natio nal 
Educational Tribunal  may prefer an appeal against such order to the 
Supreme Court within a Period of sixty days from th e date of the 
order: 
  Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after 
the expiry of the said period of sixty days. If it is satisfied that the 
appellant had sufficient cause  for not preferring the appeal within the 
period of sixty days. 
CHAPTER IV 
P
ENALTIES  
36.  Whoever fails to comply with any order made by any  State 
Educational Tribunal or the National Educational Tribunal, as the case 
may be, he she be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three years, or with fine which may e xtend to ten lakh 
rupees, or with both. 
37.  ( 1) An order made by every State Educational Tribunal  and the 
National Educational Tribunal. under this Act shall be executable as a 
decree of a civil court, and for this purpose,  the  State Educational 
Tribunal and the National Educational Tribunal and the National 
Educational Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court. 
 ( 2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  ( 1), the 
Tribunal may transmit to the Collector having juris diction over the 
concerned higher educational institution or against  the person against 
whom an order had been made, and the Collector shal l execute the 
order. 
 ( 3) Where the higher educational institution or any person, against 
whom the order is made by the State Educational Tri bunal or the 
National Educational Tribunal, as the case may be, fails to make the 
payment or deposit the amount as directed by such Tribunal within the 
period specified in the order, such amount shall be  recoverable from 
such institution or person as arrears of land revenue. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appeal against order passed under 
this Chapter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Penalty for failure to comply with 
orders of Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
Execution of award or order of 
Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38.  ( 1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence pun ishable 
under this  Chapter, save on a complaint made by th e officer 
authorised by the National Educational Tribunal or a State 
Educational Tribunal, as the case may be. 
 ( 2) No Court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan  Magistrate 
or a Chief Judicial Magistrate of first class shall  try any offence 
punishable under this Chapter. 
CHAPTER V 
M
ISCELLANEOUS  
39.  ( 1) For the purpose of inquiring into an application,  every State 
Educational Tribunal and the National Educational T ribunal shall 
have the same powers as are vested in a civil court  under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respe ct of the following 
matters, namely:– 
 ( a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any per son and 
examining him on oath; 
 ( b) requiring. the discovery and production of documents; 
 ( c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
 ( d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124  of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872, requisitioning any public recor d or document or 
copy of such record or document from any office; 
 ( e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnes ses 
documents;  
 ( f) reviewing its decisions; 
 ( g) dismissing an application for default or deciding  it  
ex parte;  
 ( h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any appli cation for 
default or any order passed by it ex parte ; and 
 ( i) any other matter which may be prescribed by the a ppropriate 
Government or by the Central Government. as the case may be. 
 ( 2) A person making an application under this Act may  appear 
either in person or authorise one or more legal pra ctitioners to present 
his case before the State Educational Tribunal or t he National 
Educational Tribunal. 
 ( 3) Any institution may authorise one or more legal p ractitioners 
or any of its officers to present its case before t he State Educational 
Tribunal or the National Educational Tribunal. 
 ( 4) The State Educational Tribunal shall not be bound  by the 
Cognizance of offences. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Procedure of State Educational 
Tribunal and National 
Educational Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be 
guided by the principles of natural justice and sub ject to other 
provisions of this Act and of any rules made by the  appropriate 
Government. 
 ( 5) The National Educational Tribunal shall not be bo und by the 
procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be 
guided by the principles of natural justice and sub ject to other 
provisions of this Act and of any rules made by the  Central 
Government. 
 ( 6) The State Educational Tribunal and the National E ducational 
Tribunal shall conduct such proceedings as may be r equired for it to 
arrive at a conclusion provided that an opportunity of being heard and 
produce such evidence as may be necessary, shall be  adequately 
offered to all the parties at issue. 
 ( 7) Every proceeding referred to in sub-section ( 6) shall be 
conducted, in the case of the State Educational Tri bunal, by its 
Chairperson and at least one Member thereof sitting together: 
 Provided that where a Member of the State Educatio nal Tribunal, 
for any reason, is unable to conduct a proceeding t ill it is completed, 
the Chairperson and the other Member of such Tribunal shall continue 
the proceeding from the stage at which it was last heard by the 
previous Member. 
 ( 8) Every proceeding referred to in sub-section ( 6) shall be 
conducted in the case of the National Educational Tribunal by a bench 
constituted by the Chairperson of the National Educ ational Tribunal 
under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 4) of section 21. 
 ( 9) On the conclusion of proceeding the State Educati onal 
Tribunal or the National Educational Tribunal. As t he case may be. 
shall pass such orders as it deems fit and provided  such relief as may 
be desirable. Including the award of such punitive damages. As it 
deems fit. To the affected party at issue: 
 Provided that where the proceeding is conducted by  the 
Chairperson and one Member of the State Educational  Tribunal and 
they differ on any point or points, they shall stat e the point or points 
on which they differ and refer the same to the othe r Member of such 
Tribunal for hearing of such point and the opinion of the majority 
shall be the order of the State Educational Tribunal:   
 Provided further that the order of the State Educa tional Tribunal 
on the matters covered under clause ( a) of section 15 shall be final.  
 ( 10 ) Every order made by the State Educational Tribuna l or the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

National Educational Tribunal as the case may be un der sub-section 
(a) shall be signed by the Chairperson or Member or M embers who 
heard the case and passed the order. 
40.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other pr ovisions of the 
Act or in any other law for the time being in force . no interim order, 
whether by way of injunction or stay in any other m anner. shall be 
made by a State Educational Tribunal or the Nationa l Educational 
Tribunal as the case may be, on or in any proceedin gs relating to an 
application unless.  
 ( a) Copies of such application and of all documents i n support of 
the plea for  such interim order are furnished to t he  party against 
whom such application is made or proposed to be made; and 
 ( b) opportunity to be heard is given to such part in  the matter. 
41.  All proceedings before any State Educational Tribu nal and the 
National  Educational Tribunal shall be deemed to b e judicial 
proceedings within the meaning of sections 193, 219  and 228 of the 
Indian Penal Code. 
42.  Not act or proceeding of  any  State Educational T ribunal or the 
National Educational  Tribunal shall be questioned or be invalid 
merely on the ground of existence of any vacancy or  defect in the 
establishment of the State Educational Tribunal and  The National 
Educational Tribunal.  
43.  The Chairperson and other Members or the State Edu cational 
Tribunals and the National Educational Tribunal and  the officers and 
other employees of the State Educational, Tribunals  and the National 
Educational Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants  within the  
meaning of section 2l of the Indian Penal Code. 
44.  The National Educational Tribunal shall have admin istrative 
control over all the State Educational Tribunals in  the following 
matters, Namely.– 
 ( a) calling for periodical returns regarding the institution. disposal 
and pendency of cases; 
 ( b) issuance of instructions regarding adoption of un iform  
procedure in the hearing of matters, prior service of copies of 
documents produced by one party to the opposite par ties. furnishing 
of English translation of orders written in any lan guage. speedy grant 
of copies of documents; 
 ( c) generally overseeing the functioning of the State  Educational 
Tribunals to ensure that the objects and purposes o f the Act are best 
 
 
 
 
Interim orders. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings before Tribunal to be 
judicial proceedings. 
 
 
 
Vacancy in State Educational 
Tribunals of National Educational 
Tribunal and to invalidate acts or 
proceedings. 
 
 
Members and staff of Tribunals to 
be public servants. 
 
 
 
 
 
Administrative control. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

served without in any way interfering with their qu asi-judicial 
freedom. 
45.  Where a matter instituted before any State Educational Tribunal or 
the National Educational Tribunal, as the case may be, is found to be 
frivolous or vexatious, it shall, for reasons to be  recorded in writing. 
dismiss the application and make an order that the applicant shall pay 
to the opposite party such cost, not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, as 
may be specified in the order. 
46.  Every order of a State Educational Tribunal or the  National 
Educational Tribunal, as the case may be, shall the  State, if no appeal 
has been preferred against such order under the provisions of this Act, 
be final.  
47.  No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertai n any suit or 
proceeding in respect of any matter which the State  Educational 
Tribunal or the National Educational Tribunal is em powered by or 
under this Act to determine and no injunction shall  be granted by any 
court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in 
pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act. 
48.  No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding sha ll lie against the 
Central Government or any State Government or again st the 
Chairperson or any other Member or any other person  authorised by 
the Chairperson of any State Educational Tribunal o r the National 
Educational Tribunal, as the case may be, for anyth ing which is done 
in good faith or intended to be done in pursuance o f this Act or any 
rule or order made thereunder in the discharge of official duties. 
49.  The provisions of this Act shall have overriding e ffect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith con tained, in any 
other law for the time being in force or in any ins trument having 
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act. 
50.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to , and not in 
derogation of the provisions of any other law for t he time being in 
force. 
51.  Nothing contained in this Act or the rules made th ereunder shall 
apply to any minority institution to the extent to which they are 
inconsistent with the functions and powers vested u pon the National 
Commission for Minority Educational Institutions es tablished under 
the National Commission for Minority Educational In stitutions Act, 
2004 or provisions contained in that Act. 
52.  ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification in th e Official 
 
 
 
Dismissal of frivolous or 
vexations complaints. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Finality of orders. 
 
 
 
Exclusion of jurisdiction of civil 
courts. 
 
 
 
 
Protection of action taken in good 
faith. 
 
 
 
 
 
Act to have overriding effect. 
 
 
 
 
 
Application of other laws not 
barred. 
 
Non-applicability of this Act to 
minority institutions in certain 
cases. 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of Central Government to 
make rules. 

Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
 ( 2) In particular, and without prejudice to the gener ality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:– 
 ( a) the form and manner in which an appeal may be preferred, the 
documents which shall be accompanied with it and th e fee payable in 
respect of filing of such appeal or for the service  of execution of 
processes under section 19; 
 ( b) the term of the Selection Committee and the manne r of 
selection of panel of names under sub-section ( 3) of section 23; 
 ( c) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Members of the 
National Educational Tribunal under sub-section ( 2) of section 24; 
 ( d) the other disqualifications for removal of the Ch airperson or 
other Member of the National Educational Tribunal under clause ( i) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 26 and, the procedure for the inquiry 
referred to in sub-section ( 3) of that section; 
 ( e) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other  terms and 
conditions of, service of, the officers and other e mployees of the 
National Educational Tribunal under sub-section ( 3) of section 30; 
 ( f) the form in which an application may be made the documents 
and other evidence by which such application shall be accompanied 
and the fee payable in respect of the filling of su ch application or for 
the service of execution of processes under section 32; 
 ( g) the other matters under clause ( i) of sub-section ( 1) of section 
39 in respect of which the National Educational Tri bunal shall have 
the powers under the Code of Civil  Procedure, 1908  while trying a 
suit; 
 ( h) the procedure for conduct of proceedings. of the National 
Educational Tribunal under sub-section ( 5) of section 39; 
 ( i)  any other matter which is required to be, or may  be, 
specified by rules or in respect of which provision  is to be made by 
rules. 
53.  ( 1) The appropriate Government may, by notification o r the 
Official Gazette, Make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
 ( 2) In particular. and without prejudice to the gener ality of the  
foregoing power, such  rules may  provide for all o r any of the 
following matters namely:– 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of State Government to 
make rules. 
 
 
 

 ( a) the term of  the Selection Committee and the mann er of 
selection of panel of names under sub-section ( 3) of section 7; 
 ( b) the salaries and allowances payable to and the ot her terms and 
conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Members of the 
State Educational Tribunal under sub-section ( 2) of section 8; 
 ( c) the other disqualifications for removal of the Ch airperson or 
other Member of the State Educational Tribunal unde r clause ( i) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 10, and the procedure for the inquiry 
referred to in sub-section ( 3) of that section; 
 ( d) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other  terms and 
conditions of service of the officers and other emp loyees of, the State 
Educational Tribunal under sub-section ( 3) of section 14; 
 ( e) the form in which an application may be made the documents 
and other evidence by which such application shall be accompanied 
and the fee payable in respect of the filing of suc h application or for 
the service of execution of processes under section 16; 
 ( f) the other matters under clause ( i) of sub-section ( 1) of section 
39 in respect of which  the State Educational Tribu nal shall have the 
Powers under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit; 
 ( g) the procedure for conduct of proceedings of the S tate 
Educational Tribunal under sub-section ( 4) of section 39;  
 ( h)  any other matter which is required to be, or may  be, specified  
by rules or in respect of which provision is to be made by rules. 
54.  ( 1) Every rule made by the Central Government under t his Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more s uccessive 
sessions, and if before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, b oth Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may b e; so, However, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be wi thout prejudice to 
the validity of anything  previously done under that rule. 
 ( 2) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before  each House of the 
State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
Legislature consists of one House, before that House. 
55.   (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rules to be laid before Parliament 
and State Legislature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to remove difficulties. 
 

Act the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedi ent for removing the 
difficulty: 
 Provided that no such order shall be made after th e expiry of the 
period of three years from the date on which this A ct receives assent 
of the President. 
 ( 2) Every order made under this section shall, as soo n as may be 
after it is made, be laid before each house of Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
In view of rapid growth in the higher education sec tor, which has resulted in increased litigation inv olving 
students, teachers, employees, managements of highe r educational institutions and universities and oth ers, 
there is an urgent need to provide for a mechanism for speedy resolution of their disputes to maintain  and to 
improve the quality and efficient functioning of institutions of higher education. 
2.   The National Policy on Education, 1986, inter alia,  states that Educational Tribunals would be 
established at the national and state level. The Programme of Action, 1992 of the National Policy on Education 
also states that Educational Tribunals would be set up considering the large volume of legal disputes generated 
in the education system. 
3.   The goals of expansion in higher education to effectively compete with other countries can be ach ieved 
only if the regulatory regime and dispute-settlemen t process -engender credibility and assurance. It i s, 
therefore, proposed to establish a two-tier structu re of Educational Tribunals at National and State l evel to 
adjudicate on the entire gamut of  disputes that arise in the higher education system through a fast rack, speedy 
recourse to justice delivery. Such a reform of inst itutional structure would enable building an effect ive system 
of checks and balances in higher education which would help the orderly growth of the sector. 
4.   The proposed Educational Tribunals Bill, 2010,  inter alia,  provides – 
 ( a) for establishment of the State Educational Tribun al consisting of a Chairperson, who is or has 
been a Judge of the High Court and two other Members, who have the ability, integrity and standing, and 
have adequate knowledge and experience of at least twenty years in dealing with matters relating to 
higher education, public affairs or administration in educational matters or is, or has been, a Vice 
Chancellor or a person who is, or has been, of the rank and equivalence of a Chief Secretary of the St ate 
Government; 
 ( b) that the State Educational Tribunal shall exercise powers and authority in relation to – 
 ( i) service matters of any teacher or any other employee of a higher educational institution; 
 ( ii ) matters relating to affiliation of any higher edu cational institution (not being an 
University) with the affiliating university; 
 ( iii ) matters relating to use of unfair practices, by a ny higher educational institution, which 
has been specifically prohibited under any other law for the time being in force; and 
 ( iv ) matters as may be assigned to it by any other law for the time being in force; 
 (c) for establishment of the National Educational Tribunal consisting of a Chairperson and upto 
eight other Members of which two shall be Judicial Members who are, or have been, a Judge of the 
Supreme Court; three shall be Academic Members who are, or have been, a Vice Chancellor of any 
University, or Director of an institution of nation al importance; and three shall be Administrative 
Members who are, or have been, a Secretary to the Government of India or equivalent rank; 
 ( d) that the National Educational Tribunal shall  exercise powers and authority in relation to– 
 ( i) any dispute between any higher educational instit ution and any appropriate statutory 
regulatory authority; 

 ( ii ) any reference made to it by any appropriate statu tory regulatory authority amongst 
Statutory Regulatory Authorities; 
 ( iii ) any matter of affiliation between any higher educ ational institution (other than an 
University) and the affiliating University, where s uch University is a Central Educational 
Institution having powers of affiliation in two or more States; 
 ( iv ) matters relating to any constituent unit of an in stitution deemed to be University or 
Central Educational Institution located in a State other than the State in which such institution 
deemed to be university or Central Educational Institution is located; and 
 ( v) matters as may be assigned to it by any other law for the time being in force; 
 ( e) that the Chairperson or Members of a State Educat ional Tribunal and the National Educational 
Tribunal shall  be ineligible for a period of five years form  the date they cease to hold office for further 
employment in any higher educational institution; 
 ( f) for imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to 
ten lakh rupees, or with both in case failure to co mply with any order made by any State Educational 
Tribunal or the National Educational Tribunal, as the case may be. 
5.   The notes on clauses explain in detail the var ious provisions contained in the Bill. 
6.   The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives . 
 
KAPIL SIBAL 
N
EW DELHI : 
The  19 th April , 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

NOTES ON CLAUSES  
  Clause  2.- This clause specifies the institutions to whic h the provisions of the proposed legislation shall 
apply. This provides that the proposes legislation shall apply to all higher educational institutions other than 
the higher educational institutions engaged mainly in agricultural education and research. 
  Clause  3.- This clause defines certain words and expressions used in the Bill. 
  Clause  4.- This clause empowers the concerned State Gover nment in case of States and the Central 
Government in case of Union territories to establish a Tribunal to be known as the “State Educational tribunal” 
to exercise the powers conferred upon it under the proposed legislation in each State or Union territory. It also 
empowers the State Government to notify any Educati onal Tribunal existing before the commencement of t he 
proposed legislation as the State Educational Tribunal for the purposes of the proposed  legislation. 
  Clause  5.- This clause  provides that each State Educatio nal Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and 
two other Members, of which one shall be a woman to be appointed by the  appropriate Government. 
  Clause  6.- This clause specifies the qualifications for a ppointment  as Chairperson or Members of the 
State Educational Tribunal. Sub-clause (1) provide that a person shall be qualified to be appointed as  the 
Chairperson of a State Educational Tribunal, if suc h person is, or has been, a Judge of the High Court  and the 
appointment of the Chairperson shall be made only after consultation with the Chief Justice of the High  Court. 
Sub-clause (2) provides that a person shall be qual ified to be appointed as a Member of the State Educ ational 
Tribunal, if such person is not less than fifty-fiv e years of age and is of ability, integrity and sta nding, and has 
adequate knowledge and experience of at least twent y years in dealing with matters relating to higher 
education, public affairs or administration in educational matters. Sub-clause (3) states that out of the two other 
Members, one Member shall be chosen from amongst pe rsons who is, or, has been, the Vice Chancellor and  
the other Member shall be chosen from amongst perso ns who is, or has been, the Chief Secretary of the State 
Government or equivalent rank. 
  Clause 7.- This clause provides for the selection  of the Chairperson and other Members of the State 
Educational Tribunal. The Selection Committee shall  comprise the Chief Justice of the High Court or hi s 
nominee as its Chairperson, the Chief Secretary of the State Government and an officer of the State 
Government of the rank and equivalence of a Secreta ry to the Government of India with experience in de aling 
with educational matters as its Members. It provides that the Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of 
names to the appropriate Government for appointment. Sub-clause (2) provides that the Secretary in cha rge of 
higher education in the Department of Education or Department dealing with educational matters of the State 
Government shall be the convenor of the meetings of  the Selection Committee. Sub-clause (3) provides t hat 
the term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of names may be prescribed by rules 
by the appropriate Government. Sub-clause (5) provi des that the Selection Committee may regulate its o wn 
procedure in its deliberations. Sub-clause (4) stat es that no appointment of the Chairperson or Member  of the 
State Educational Tribunal shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee. 
  Clause  8.- This clause provides that the Chairperson and other Member of the State Educational Tribunal 
shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which they enter upon office and shall be eligible for 
reappointment, but shall not hold office after they  have attained the age of seventy years. Sub-clause  (2) 
provides that the salaries and allowances payable t o, and the other terms and conditions of service of , the 
Chairperson and other Members shall be prescribed by the appropriate Government. 

  Clause  9.- This clause provides the manner in which the C hairperson or a Member of the State 
Educational Tribunal may resign his office. This pr ovides that the Chairperson or Member may, by notic e in 
writing under his hand addressed to the appropriate  Government, resign his office and shall, unless he  is 
permitted by the appropriate Government to relinqui sh his office sooner, continue to hold office until  the 
expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor 
enters upon office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest. 
  Clause  10.- This clause provides the manner of removal of  the chairperson or a Member of the State 
Educational Tribunal. It specifies the ground for r emoval of the chairperson and Member which, inter-alia,  
include where the Chairperson or a Member has been is an adjudged an insolvent or has engaged at any t ime 
during his term of office in any paid employment, o r has been convicted of an offence which in the opi nion of 
the Central Government involves moral turpitude, or  has become physically or mentally incapable, or is  of 
unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court, or has acquired such financial or other inte rest as 
is likely to affect prejudicially the exercise of h is functions, or has so abused his position as to r ender his 
continuance in office prejudicial to the public int erest, or has been guilty of proved misbehavior or has such 
other disqualifications as may be prescribed under rules made by the appropriate Government. Sub-claus e (2) 
provides that no Chairperson or a Member of the Sta te Educational Tribunal shall be removed from his o ffice 
on the grounds specified in clause (f) or clause (g ) or clause (h) of sub-cause (l) in this clause, ex cept by an 
order made by the appropriate Government after an inquiry made in this behalf by a Judge of the High Court in 
which such Chairperson or Member has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. Sub-clause (3) empowers the appropriate Government to regulate the procedure for 
the inquiry. 
  Clause  11.- This clause provides that if any vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson or a Member 
of the State Educational Tribunal for any reason ot her than temporary absence, the appropriate Governm ent 
shall appoint another person to fill the vacancy an d the proceedings may be continued before the State  
Educational Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled. 
  Clause  12.- This clause provides that in the event of the  occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the 
Chairperson of the State Educational Tribunal by re ason of his death or resignation, the senior-most M ember 
of the State Educational Tribunal shall act as the Chairperson of the Tribunal until the date on which  a new 
Chairperson appointed to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office. It further also provides that when  the 
Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions ow ing to absence, illness or any other cause, the sen ior most 
Member shall discharge the functions of the Chairpe rson until the date on which the Chairperson resume s his 
duties. 
  Clause  13.- This clause provides for the prohibitions as to holding of offices by Chairperson or Member 
on ceasing to be such Chairperson or Member of Stat e Educational Tribunal. It provides that the Chairp erson 
or Member shall be ineligible, for a period of five  years from the date on which they cease to hold th e office, 
for further employment in, or, in matters related to, any higher educational institution within the State, whether 
under the Central Government or the Government of a ny State or any private educational institution and  that 
the Chairperson or Member shall not appear, act or plead before the State Educational Tribunal in whic h they 
had been the Chairperson or Member. 
  Clause  14.- This clause empowers the appropriate Government to determine, after consultations with the 
Chairperson of the State Educational Tribunal, the nature and categories of the officers and other emp loyees 
required to assist the Tribunal in the discharge of  its functions and provide such Tribunal with such officers 

and other employees as it may think fit. It further  provides that the officers and other employees of the State 
Educational Tribunal shall discharge their function s under the general superintendence of the Chairper son of 
the Tribunal. It also empowers the appropriate Gove rnment to determine the salaries and allowances pay able 
and the other terms and conditions of service of th e officers and other employees of the State Educati onal 
Tribunal. 
  Clause  15.- This clause specifies the jurisdiction, power s authority to be exercised by the State 
Educational Tribunal in relation to service matters  of any teacher or any other employee of a higher 
educational institution; matters relating to affili ation of any higher educational institution (not be ing an 
University) with the affiliating  University: matters relating to use of unfair practices by any higher educational 
institution. which has been specifically prohibited under any law for the time being in force and matters as may 
be assigned to it by any other law for the time being in force. 
  Clause  16.- This clause empowers the appropriate Governme nt to prescribe the manner, the form, the 
documents required and the fees to be paid in makin g an application before the State Educational Tribu nal for 
adjudication of any grievance. 
  Clause  17.- This clause provides that the State Education al Tribunal shall not admit an application for 
adjudication in disputes under sub-cause (a) of clause 15 relating to service matters of any teacher or any other 
employee of a higher educational institution unless  it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the 
remedies available under the relevant service rules  for redressal of grievances or settlement of dispu tes. Sub-
clause (2) provides that a person shall be deemed to have availed of all the remedies available to him under the 
relevant service rules or contractual provisions if  a final order has been made by the higher educatio nal 
institution or other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such order, rejecting any appeal 
preferred or representation made by such person in connection with the grievance or disputes; or  wher e no 
final order has been made by the higher educational  institution or other authority or officer or other  person 
competent to pass such order with regard to the application or representation made or appeal preferred by such 
person, if a period of three months from the date o n which such application or representation was made  or 
appeal was preferred has expired; or where no servi ce rules exist on the service matter in dispute. It  further 
provides that an order passed in any arbitration or  any conciliation proceedings under the Arbitration  and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 would not be subject to adjudication by the State Educational Tribunal. 
  Clause  18.- This clause provides for limitation. It provi des that a State Educational Tribunal shall not 
admit an application in a case where a final order under clause ( a) of sub-clause ( 2) of clause 17 has been 
made, unless the application is made within a period of six months from the date of the final order or  in a case 
where an appeal or representation as mentioned in clause ( b) of sub-clause ( 2) of clause 17 has been made and 
a period of three months had expired without any fi nal order having been made, within a period of six months 
from the date of expiry of the period of three mont hs. It further provides that in any other matter th e State 
Educational Tribunal shall not admit an application unless it has been made within a period of six months from 
the date the cause of action arose. Sub-clause (2) provides that the State Educational Tribunal may ad mit an 
application after the specified period of six month s if the applicant satisfies the Tribunal that he h ad sufficient 
cause for not making the application within this period. 
  Clause  19.- This clause provides that any person aggrieve d by an order made by a State Educational 
Tribunal may prefer an appeal against the order to the National Educational Tribunal within a period o f sixty 
days from the date of the order. It further empower s the National Educational Tribunal to entertain an  appeal 

after the expiry of the period of sixty days, if it  is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cau se for not 
preferring the appeal within this period. 
  Clause  20.- This clause empowers the Central Government t o establish a National Educational Tribunal 
to exercise the powers conferred upon it under the proposed legislation. 
  Clause  21.- This clause provides that the National Educat ional Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson 
and such number of Members not exceeding eight to b e appointed the Central Government. Sub-clause (2) 
provides that out or the eight other Members, two s hall be Judicial Members, three shall be Academic 
Members and three shall be Administrative Members. Sub-clause (2) specifies that not less than one-thi rd of 
the total number or Members shall be women. Sub-cla use (4) provides that subject to the provisions of the 
proposed legislation, the jurisdiction of the National Educational Tribunal may be exercised by Benches with a 
Bench being constituted by the Chairperson consisti ng of three Members of which one Member shall be a 
Judicial Member, one Member an Academic Member and one Member an Administrative Member. Sub-clause 
(5) provides that the Chairperson may transfer a Me mber from one Bench to another Bench. Sub-clause (6 ) 
provides that the National Educational Tribunal shall sit at New Delhi. 
  Clause  22.- This clause specifies the qualifications for appointment as Chairperson or Members of the 
National Educational Tribunal. Sub-clause (1) provi des that a person shall be qualified to be appointe d as the 
Chairperson or Judicial Member of the National Educ ational Tribunal, if such person is, or has been, a  Judge 
of the Supreme Court and the appointment of the Cha irperson shall be made only after consultation with  the 
Chief Justice of India .Sub-clause (2) provides tha t a person shall be qualified to be appointed as a Academic 
Member of the National Educational Tribunal, if suc h person is not less than fifty-five years of age a nd is of 
ability, integrity and standing, and has adequate k nowledge and experience of at least twenty years in  dealing 
with matters relating to higher education, public a ffairs or administration in educational matters or is or has 
been a Vice-Chancellor of any University or a Director of an institution of national importance. Sub-clause (3) 
provides that a person shall be qualified to be appointed as a Administrative Member if he is not less then fifty-
five years of age and is of ability, integrity and standing having knowledge and experience of not les s than 
twenty-five years in dealing with matters relating to higher education, public affairs or administrati on in 
educational matters and is, or has been, a Secretary to the Government of India or equivalent rank. 
  Clause  23.- This clause provides for the selection of the  Chairperson and other Members of the National 
Educational Tribunal. Sub-clause (1) provides that the Selection Committee shall comprise the Chief Justice of 
India or his nominee as its Chairperson, the Secret ary in charge of higher education in the Ministry o f Human  
Resource Development, the Secretary in the Ministry  of Law and Justice, the Secretary in charge of med ical 
education in the Ministry of Health and Family Welf are and the Secretary in charge of the Department o f 
Personnel and Training as its Members. Which shall recommend a panel of names to the Central Governmen t 
for appointment. Sub-clause (2) provides that the S ecretary in charge of higher education in the Minis try of 
Human Resource Development shall be the convenor of  the meetings of the Selection Committee. Sub-claus e 
(3) provides that the term of the Selection Committ ee and the manner of selection of panel of names sh all be 
prescribed by rules by the Central Government. Sub-clause (4) states that no appointment of the Chairperson or 
Member of the National Educational Tribunal shall b e invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the 
Selection Committee. Sub-clause (5) provides that the Selection Committee may regulate its own procedure in 
its deliberations. 
  Clause  24.- This clause provides that the Chairperson and Member of the National Educational Tribunal 
shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which they enter upon office and shall be eligible for 

reappointment, but shall not hold office after they  halve attained the age of seventy years. Sub-claus e (2) 
provides that the salaries and allowances payable t o, and the other terms and conditions of service of  the 
Chairperson and other Members shall be prescribed by the Central Government. 
  Clause  25.- This clause provides the manner in which the Chairperson or a Member of the National 
Educational Tribunal shall resign office. It provides that the Chairperson or Member may, by notice in  writing 
under his hand addressed to the Central Government,  resign his office and shall, unless he is permitte d by the 
Central Government to relinquish his office sooner,  continue to hold office until the expiry of three months 
from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon  office or 
until the expiry of his terms of office, whichever is the earliest. 
  Clause  26.- This  clause provides the manner of  removal the Chairperson or a Member of the National 
Educational Tribunal. It specifies the grounds for removal which inter-alia,  include where the Chairperson or a 
Member has been is an adjudged an insolvent, has or engaged at any time during his term of office in a ny paid 
employment, or has  been convicted of an offence wh ich in the opinion of the Central Government involv es 
moral turpitude, or has become physically or mentally incapable, or is of unsound mind and stands so declared 
by a competent court, or has acquired such financia l or other interest as is likely to affect prejudic ially the 
exercise of his functions, or has so abused his pos ition as to render his continuance in office prejud icial to the 
public interest, or has been guilty of proved misbe havior or has such other disqualifications as may b e 
prescribed under rules made by  the Central Governm ent. Sub-clause (2)  provides that no Chairperson o r a 
Member of the National Educational Tribunal shall b e removed from his office on the ground specified i n 
clause (1) or Clause (g) or clause (h) of sub-claus e (1) in this clause except by an order made by the  Central 
Government after an inquiry made in this behalf by a Judge of the Supreme Court in which the Chairperson or 
Member has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. Sub-
clause (3) empowers the Central Government to regulate the procedure for the inquiry. 
  Clause  27.- This clause provides that if any vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson or a Member 
of the National Educational Tribunal for any reason  other than temporary absence, the Central Governme nt 
shall appoint another person to fill the vacancy an d the proceedings   may be continued before the Nat ional 
Educational Tribunal form the stage at which the vacancy is filled.  
  Clause  28.- This clause provides that  in the event of th e occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the 
Chairperson of the National Educational Tribunal by  reason of his death or resignation. The senior-mos t 
Member of the National Educational Tribunal shall a ct as the Chairperson of the Tribunal until the dat e on 
which a new Chairperson appointed to fill such vaca ncy, enters upon his office. It further also provid es that 
when the Chairperson is unable to discharge his fun ctions owing to absence, illness of any other cause , the 
senior most Member shall discharge the functions of  the Chairperson until the date on which the Chairp erson 
resumes his duties.  
  Clause  29.- This clause provides for the prohibitions as to holding of offices by Chairperson or Member 
on ceasing to be such Chairperson or Member of Nati onal Educational Tribunal. It provides that the 
Chairperson or Member shall, subject to the provisi ons of the proposed legislation, be ineligible, for  a period 
of  five years from the date on which they cease to hold office, for further employment (including as consultant 
or expert or otherwise) in any higher educational i nstitution, whether under the Central Government or  the 
Government  of any State or any  private educationa l institution and that the Chairperson or Member sh all not 
appear, act or plead before the National Educationa l Tribunal in which they had been the Chairperson o r 
Member. 

  Clause  30.- This clause empowers the Central Government t o determine after consultations with the 
Chairperson of the National Educational Tribunal, t he nature and categories of the officers and other 
employees required to assist the Tribunal in the discharge of its  functions and provide such Tribunal with such 
officers and other employees as it may think fit. It further provides that the officers and other employees of the 
National Educational Tribunal shall discharge their  functions under the general superintendence of the  
Chairperson of the Tribunal. The clause also empowe rs the Central Government  to prescribe the salarie s  and 
allowances  payable and the other terms and conditi ons of service of the officers and other employees of the 
National Educational Tribunal. 
  Clause  31.- This clause specifies the jurisdiction, power s and authority to be exercised by the National 
Educational  Tribunal. It  provides that jurisdicat ion of the National Educational  Tribunal shall ext end to 
matters of dispute between any higher educational i nstitution and any appropriate statutory regulatory  
authority; any reference made to it by any appropri ate statutory regulatory authority, disputes amongs t 
Statutory Regulatory Authorities; any matters of af filiation between any higher educational institutio n (other 
than an University) and the affiliating University,  where such University is a Central Educational Ins titution 
having powers of affiliation in two or more States;  any constituents unit of an institution deemed to be 
University  or a Central Educational institution is  located in a State other than the State in which s uch 
institution deemed to be university or a Central Ed ucational institution is located, and on matters as  may be 
assigned to it by any other law for the time being in force. Sub-clause (2) provides that the National  
Educational Tribunal shall exercise appellate juris diction  over any matter decided by any State  Educ ational 
Tribunal. Sub-clause (3) provides that the National  Educational Tribunal shall have the power to call for the 
records and pass appropriate orders in any matter w hich is pending before or has been decided by any S tate 
Educational Tribunal, where it appears to the Natio nal Educational Tribunal that the State Educational  
Tribunal has exercised a jurisdiction not vested in  it by law, or has failed to exercise a jurisdictio n vested or 
has acted in exercise of its jurisdiction illegally  or with material irregularity. Sub-clause (4) prov ides that the 
National Educational Tribunal may exercise jurisdic tion in respect of matters vested in the State Educ ational 
Tribunal where cases involving the same or substant ially the same issues, to the satisfaction of the N ational 
Educational Tribunal, either on its own motion or o n an application made by a party to any such case, are 
pending before the National Educational Tribunal an d one or more State Educational Tribunals or before  two 
or more State Educational Tribunals, the National E ducational Tribunal may withdraw the case or cases 
pending before the State Educational Tribunal or th e State Educational Tribunals and dispose of all th e cases 
itself. 
  Clause  32.- This clause empowers the Central Government t o prescribe the manner, the form, the 
documents required and the fees to be paid in makin g an application before the National Educational Tr ibunal 
for adjudication of any grievance. 
  Clause  33.- This clause provides that the National Educat ional Tribunal shall not admit an application 
for adjudication in disputes relating to service ma tters of any teacher or any other employee of  high er 
educational institution or a Central Educational in stitution referred to sub-clause (a) or clause 3, u nless it is 
satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the  remedies available under the relevant service rule s for 
redressal  of grievances or settlement of disputes.  Sub-clause (2) provides that a person shall be dee med to 
have availed of all the remedies available to him u nder the relevant service rules or contractual prov isions if a 
final order has been made by the higher educational  institution or other authority or officer or other  person 
competent to pass such order, rejecting any appeal preferred or representation made by such person in 
connection with the grievance or disputes or where no final order has been made by the higher educatio nal 

institution or other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such order with regard to the 
application or representation made or appeal prefer red by such person, if a period of three months fro m the 
date on which such application or representation wa s made or appeal was preferred has expired; or wher e no 
service rules exist on the service matter in dispute. It further provides that an order passed in any arbitration or 
any conciliation proceedings under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 would not be subject to 
adjudication by the National Educational Tribunal. 
  Clause  34.-This clause provides that a National Education al Tribunal shall not admit an application in a 
case where a final order referred to in clause (a) of sub-clause (2) of clause 33 has been made, unles s the 
application is made within a period of six months f rom the dare of the final order or in a case where an appeal 
or representation as in mentioned  clause (b) of sub-clause (2) of clause 33 has been made and a period of three 
months had expired without any final order having b een made, within a period of six months from the da te of 
expiry of the period of three months. The clause fu rther provides that in any other matter the Nationa l 
Educational  Tribunal shall not admit an applicatio n  unless it has  been made  within a period of six  months 
from the date the cause of action arose. Sub-clause  (2) provides that the National  Educational  Tribu nal can 
admit an application after the specified period of six months if the applicant satisfies the Tribunal that he had 
sufficient cause for not marking the application within this period. 
  Clause  35.- This clause provides that any person aggrieve d by an order made by a National Educational 
Tribunal may prefer an appeal against the order to the Supreme Court within a period of sixty days fro m the 
order. The clause empowers the Supreme Court to ent ertain an appeal after the expiry of the period of sixty 
days, if it is satisfied  that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within this period. 
  Clause  36.-This clause specifies the penalties for failure to comply with orders of the Tribunals under the 
proposed legislation. It provides that a person sha ll be punishable with imprisonment for a term which  may 
extend to three years. or with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees, or with both if he fails to c omply with 
any  order made by any State Educational Tribunal or the National Educational Tribunal. 
  Clause  37.- This clause provides that an order made by ev ery State Educational Tribunal and the 
National Educational Tribunal under the proposed le gislation shall be executable as a decree of a civi l court, 
and for this purpose the Tribunals shall have all t he powers of a civil court. Sub-clause (2) provides  that the 
Tribunals under the proposed legislation may transm it the order to the Collector having jurisdiction o ver the 
concerned higher educational institution or against the person against whom the order had been made, a nd the 
Collector shall execute the order. Sub-clause (3) p rovide, that where the higher educational instituti on or any 
person against whom the order is made by the Tribun als, fails to make the payment or deposit the amoun t as 
directed by the Tribunal within the period specifie d in the order, the amount shall be recoverable fro m the 
institution or person as arrears of land revenue. 
  Clause  38.- This clause provides that no court shall take  cognizance of any offence except on a 
complaint made by an officer authorized by the National  Educational Tribunal or a State Educational Tribunal 
under the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) prov ides that no court inferior to that of a Chief Metr opolitan 
Magistrate or a Chief Judicial Magistrate of first class shall try any offence. 
  Clause  39.-This clause provides for procedure of the Nati onal Educational Tribunal or a State 
Educational Tribunal under the proposed legislation . Sub-clause (1) vests powers of a civil court unde r the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respect of the matters specified therein. Sub-cl ause(2) 
provides that a person making an application may ap pear either in person or authorise one or more lega l 

practitioners to present his case before the State Educational Tribunal or the National Educational Tr ibunal. 
Sub-clause (3) provides that an institution may authorise one or more legal practitioners or any of its officers to 
present its case before the Tribunals under this le gislation. Sub-clauses (4) and (5) provides that th e State 
Educational Tribunal or the National Educational Tr ibunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid dow n in 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guid ed by the principles of natural justice and subject  to other 
provisions of the proposed legislation and of any r ules made by the appropriate Government or the Cent ral 
Government respectively in case if the State Educational Tribunal and the National Educational Tribunal. Sub-
clause (6) provides that the Tribunals shall conduc t its proceedings as may be required for it to arri ve at a 
conclusion provided that an opportunity of being he ard and produce evidence is adequately offered to a ll the 
parties at issue. Sub-clause (7) provides that ever y proceeding before the State Educational Tribunals  shall be 
conducted by its Chairperson and at least one Membe r sitting together. However, where a Member for any  
reason is unable to conduct a proceeding till it is  completed, the Chairperson and the other Member of  the 
Tribunal shall continue the proceeding from the stage at which it was last heard by the previous Member. Sub-
clause (8) provides that every proceeding in case o f National Educational Tribunal shall be conducted by its 
benches. Sub-clause (9) provides that on the conclusion of proceedings, the Tribunals Shall pass such orders as 
it deems fit and provide such relief including the award of such punitive damages, as it deems fit, to  the 
affected party at issue. It further provides that w here the proceeding is conducted by the Chairperson  and one 
Member of the State Educational Tribunal and they d iffer on any point or points,  they shall state the  point or 
points they differ and refer the same to the other Member of the said Tribunals for hearing on the poi nts of 
difference and the opinion of the majority shall be the order of the said Tribunal. Sub-clause (10) provides that 
every order made by the State Educational Tribunal or the National Educational Tribunal shall be signed by the 
Chairperson and Member or Members who  heard the case and passed the order. 
  Clause  40. -This clause provides the power of the Tribuna l relating to interim orders while hearing the 
matter. It provides that no interim order, whether by way of injunction or stay of any other manner, s hall be 
made by a State Educational Tribunal or the National Educational Tribunal in any proceedings unless copies of 
the application and of all documents in support of the plea for the interim order are furnished to the  party 
against whom the application is made and opportunity to be heard is given to the opposing party in the matter. 
  Clause  41.- This clause provides that all proceedings bef ore the Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial 
proceedings with the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code. 
  Clause  42.- This clause provides that no act or proceedin g of any State Educational Tribunal or the 
National Educational Tribunal shall be questioned o r be invalid merely on the ground of existence of a ny 
vacancy or defect in the establishment of the Tribunal. 
  Clause  43.- This clause provided that the Chairperson, ot her Members and the officers and other 
employees of the State Educational Tribunals or the  National Educational Tribunal shall be deemed to b e 
public servants within the meaning of Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
  Clause  44.- This clause provides for administrative control of the National Educational Tribunal over the 
State Educational Tribunals in the matter of calling for periodical returns regarding the institution, disposal and 
pendency of cases and issuance of instructions rega rding adoption of uniform procedure in the hearing of 
matters, prior service of copies of documents produced by one party to the opposite parties, furnishing English 
translation of orders written in any language, speedy grant of copies of documents and generally overseeing the 
functioning of the Slate Educational Tribunals to ensure that the objects and purposes of the legislation are best 
served without in any way interfering with their quasi-judicial freedom. 

  Clause  45.- This clause provides for dismissal of frivolo us or vexatious complaints filed before the 
Tribunals and imposition of penalty. It provides th at where a matter instituted before any State Educa tional 
Tribunal or the National Educational Tribunal is fo und to be frivolous or vexatious, the concerned Tri bunal 
shall, for reasons to be recorded in writing, dismi ss the application and make an order that the appli cant shall 
pay to the opposite party the cost not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, as may be specified in the order. 
  Clause  46.- This clause provides for finality of the orde rs of the State Educational Tribunal or the 
National Educational Tribunal in case no appeal is filed against the order. 
  Clause  47.- This clause ousts the jurisdiction of the Civ il Courts to exercise the jurisdiction, power or 
authority in relation to such matters as are exercisable by the Tribunals under the proposed legislation. 
  Clause  48.- This clause seeks to provide the protection t o the Central Government, the State 
Government, the Chairpersons and any other Members of the State Educational Tribunals or the National 
Educational Tribunal or any other person against su it, prosecution or other legal proceeding for the a ction 
taken in good faith or in discharge of the official duties. 
  Clause  49.- This clause provides that the provision of th e proposed legislation shall have an overriding 
effect on any other law for the time being in force or any instrument having the force of law. 
  Clause  50.- This clause provides that the provisions of t his legislation shall be in addition to, and not in  
derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 
  Clause  51.- This clause provides that nothing contained i n the proposed legislation or the rules made 
thereunder shall apply to any minority institution to the extent to which they are inconsistent with the functions 
and powers vested upon the National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions established under  the 
National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions, 2004 or provisions contained in that Act. 
  Clause  52.- This clause provides for power of the Central Government to make rules. It provides that the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Offi cial Gazette. Make rules to carry out the provision s of the 
proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) specifies matt ers for which such rules may be made by the Central  
Government.  
  Clause  53.- This clause provides for power of the State G overnment to make rules. It provides that the 
appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provi sions of 
the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) specifies matters for which such rules may be made by the appropriate 
Government. 
  Clause  54.- This clause provides that every rule made by the Central Government shall be required to be 
laid before each House of Parliament and every rule made by the State Government shall by required to be laid 
before the appropriate State legislature. 
  Clause  55.- This clause empowers the Central Government t o make, by order published in the official 
Gazette, provisions for removal of difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed leg islation. 
Such orders could be made only within two years fro m the commencement of the proposed legislation. Sub -
clause (2) provides that every order issued under t his clause is required to be laid before each House  of 
Parliament. 
 
 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM  
  Clause 20 of the Bill provides that the Central G overnment shall establish as the National Education al 
Tribunal to exercise the power conferred on it by o r under the proposed legislation Clause 21 of the B ill 
provides that the Tribunal shall consist of a Chair person and two judicial Members, three Academic Mem bers 
and three Administrative Members Sub-clause (2) of clause 24 of the Bill provides that the salaries an d 
allowances payable to, and the other terms and cond itions of service of the Chairperson and other Memb ers 
shall be determined by the Central Government. Sub- clause (1) of clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Ce ntral 
Government to determine after consultation with the  Chairperson the nature and categories of officers and 
other employees required to assist the Tribunal. Su b-clause (3) of said clause provides the salaries a nd 
allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service, of the officers and other employees of the 
Tribunal.    
2.  On a representative basis the recurring annual expenditure on salary of the Chairperson, Members, 
Officers and other staff of the National Educational Tribunal and other administrative expenses is estimated to 
be one crore  and twenty-five lakh rupees and the one-time capital investment is estimated to be about ten crore 
rupees. 
3.  Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall establish the State Educational Tr ibunal 
in each Union Territory to exercise the powers conferred on it by or under the proposed legislation Clause 5 of 
the Bill provides that the Tribunal shall consist o f a Chairperson and two other Members. Sub-clause ( 2) of 
clause 8 of the Bill provides that the salaries and  allowances payable to, and the other terms and con ditions of 
service of the Chairperson and other Members shall be determined by the Central Government Sub-clause (1) 
of clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to determine after consultation with the Chairperson 
the nature and categories of officers and other employees required to assist the Tribunal. Sub-clause (3) of said 
clause provides for the salaries and allowances. Payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
officers and other employees of the Tribunal.   
4.   On a representative basis, the recurring annua l expenditure on salary of the Chairperson, Members , 
officers and other staff of each State Educational Tribunal and other administrative expenses is estimated to be 
one crore rupees and the one-time capital investmen t is estimated to be about ten crore rupees for the  seven 
Union territories. The annual recurring expenditure  is estimated to be seven crore rupees and the one- time 
capital investment of seventy crore rupees.  
5.  The manpower requirement and the total financia l implication in terms of recurring and non-recurri ng 
expenditure as well as the modalities involved woul d however, be determined after appointment of the 
Chairperson and Members of the proposed State Educational Tribunal. Hence, It would be difficult to work out 
the exact expenditure, Both recurring and non-recurring at this stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION  
  Sub-clause (1)of  clause 52 empowers the Central Government  to make, by notification in the officia l 
Gazette, rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the proposed  legislation. Sub-clause  (2) 
includes —(a) the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia,  specifies the 
form and manner in which an appeal may be  preferred, the documents which shall be accompanied with it and 
the fee payable in respect of filing of such appeal  or for the service of execution of processes under  clause 19; 
(b) the term of the Selection Committee and the man ner of selection of panel of names under sub clause  (3) of 
clause 23; (c) the salaries and allowances payable to the other terms and conditions of service of the  
Chairperson and other Members of the National Educational Tribunal under sub-clause (2) of clause24; (d) the 
procedure for the inquiry referred to in  sub-clause (3) of clause 26; (e) the salaries and allowances payable to, 
and other terms and  conditions of service of the o fficer and other employees of  the National Educati onal  
Tribunal under sub-clause (3) of clause 30; (f) the  form in which an application may be made, the docu ments 
and other evidence by which such application shall be accompanied  and the fee payable in respect of the filing 
of such application or for the service of execution  of  processes under clause 32; (g) the other matte rs under 
clause (i) of sub-clause (1) of clause 39 in respec t of which the National Educational Tribunal shall have the 
powers under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 whil e trying a suit; (h) the procedure for conduct of 
proceedings of the National Educational Tribunal under sub-clause (5) of Clause 39. 
2.   Sub-Clause (1) of clause 53 empowers the State  Government to make, by notification in the Officia l 
Gazette, rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) 
specifies the matters in respect of which such rule s may be made. These matters, inter alia , include – (a) the 
term of the Selection Committee and the manner of s election of panel of names under sub-clause (3) of clause 
7; (b) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the C hairperson 
and other Members of the State Educational Tribunal under sub-clause (2) or clause 8; (c) the procedure for the 
inquiry referred to in sub-clause (3) of clause 10;  (d) the salaries and allowances payable to, and ot her terms 
and conditions of service of the officers and other  employees of the State Educational Tribunal under sub-
clause (3) of clause 14; (c) the form in which an a pplication may be made, the documents and other evi dence 
by which such application shall be accompanied and the fee payable in respect of the filing of such application 
or for the service of execution of processes under clause 16; (f) the other matters under clause (i) of sub-clause 
(l) of clause 39 in respect of which the State Educ ational Tribunal shall have the powers under the Co de of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit; (g) the procedure for conduct of proceedings of the State Educational 
Tribunal under sub-clause (4) of clause 39. In so f ar as it relate to a Union territory the Central Go vernment 
shall make rules for the purposes of this clause. 
3.   Clause 54 provides that every rule made by the  Central Government are required to be laid before each 
House of Parliament and every rule made by the Stat e Government are required to be laid before each Ho use 
of the State Legislature where it consists of two H ouses, or where such Legislature consists of one Ho use, 
before that House. 
4.   The matters in respect of which rules may be m ade relate to matters of procedure or administrativ e 
details and it is not practicable to provide for th em in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislativ e power is, 
therefore, of a normal character. 
 
 
 

 
LOK  SABHA  
––––––– 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of Educational Tri bunals for effective and expeditious  
adjudication of disputes involving teachers and oth er employees of higher educational  
institutions and other stake holders (including stu dents, universities, institutions  
and statutory regulatory authorities) and to adjudi cate penalties for indulging in unfair 
practices in higher education and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
––––––– 
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Human Resource Development ) 
 
 

LOK SABHA 
------ 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE EDUCATIONAL TRIBUNALS BILL, 2010  
[To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha] 
1.  Page (i), in the arrangement of clauses, in cla use 2,- 
   for “Applicability of Act” 
   read “Application of Act” 
2.  Page 3, line 32,- 
   for “cognote” 
   read “cognate”  
3.  Page 4, line 7,- 
   for “leaving” 
   read  “being” 
4.  Page 6, line 47,- 
   for “not being” 
   read “not being a” 
5.  Page 19, line 2,- 
   for “authority amongst” 
   read ‘authority, a dispute amongst” 
6.  Page 20, line 3,- 
   for “proposes” 
   read “proposed” 
7.  Page 21, line 10,- 
   for “Member which” 
   read “Members which” 
8.  Page 21, line 17,- 
   for “misbehavior” 
   read “misbehaviour” 

9.  Page 23, line 3, 
   for “out or the” 
   read “out of the” 
10.  Page 23, line 5,- 
   for “Sub-clause (2)” 
   read “Sub-clause (3)” 
11.  Page 23, line 24,- 
   for “a Administrative” 
   read “an Administrative” 
12.  Page 24, line 7,- 
   for “has been is an adjudged an insolvent,” 
   read “has been adjudged insolvent,” 
13.  Page 24, line 8,- 
   for “has or engaged”, 
   read “or has engaged” 
14.  Page 24, line 17,- 
   for “sub-clause (1)” 
   read “sub-section (1)” 
15.  Page 24, line 31,- 
   for “further also provides” 
   read “further provides” 
16.  Page 25, line 2,-  
   for “Education” 
   read “Educational” 
17.  Page 25, line 6,- 
   for “than an University” 
   read “than University” 
18.  Page 25, line 33,- 
   for “referred to sub-clause (a) of clause 3” 
   read “referred to in clause (d) of section 31" 
19.  Page 25. line 4 from the bottom,- 

   for “in mentioned” 
   read “is mentioned” 
20.  Page 25, line 3 from the bottom,- 
   for “sub-clause (2) of clause 33” 
   read  “sub-section (2) of section 33" 
21.  Page 27, line 1,- 
   fot “the Tribunals” 
   read “the Tribunal”  
22.  Page 27, line 6,- 
   for “the said Tribunal” 
   read “such Tribunal” 
23.  Page 27, line 24,- 
   for “clause provided” 
   read “clause provides” 
24.  Page 28, line 11,- 
   for “Institutions 2004” 
   read “Institutions Act, 2004” 
25.  Page 29, line 8,- 
   for “Central Governments” 
   read “Central Government” 
26.  Page 30, line 3,- 
   omit “in the Official Gazette” 
26.  Page 30, line 22,- 
   omit  “in the Omcial Gazette” 
27.  Page 30, Omit lines 8 and 9 from the bottom. 
 
N
EW DELHI ; . 
April  27, 2010  
Vaisakha  7,1932 ( Saka ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XXVI  
TWENTY - SIXTH MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 29th July, 2010 in 
Committee Room’ A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman  
 2. Shri N.K. Singh 
 3. Shri M. Rama Jois 
 4. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 5. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  
 6. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
  LOK  SABHA  
 7. Shri Suresh Angadi 
 8. Shri P.K. Biju 
 9. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson  
 10. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 11. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
 12. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 13. Shri Tapas Paul 
 14. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
  LIST OF WITNESSES  
 I.  DEP ARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION  
  MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
  (i) Shrimati Vibha Puri Das, Secretary 
  (ii) Shri Sunil Kumar, Additional Secretary  
  (iii) Shri R.P. Sisodia, Director, UGC 
  (iv) Shri V. Umashankar, P.S. to H.R.M. 
 II.  LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT  
  Dr. G.N. Raju, Joint Secretary 
  SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the member s to the meeting of the Committee and apprised them  
about the agenda i.e.  a preliminary discussion with the Secretary, Depar tment of Higher Education on the 
Educational Tribunals Bill, 2010. The Chairman info rmed the members that the background note from the 
Department indicated that very few States had respo nded on the Bill. In view of State Educational Trib unals 

proposed to be set up under the Bill, the Committee  decided to take up the matter with the States so a s to 
ensure wider consultation process. The Committee, accordingly, authorized the Chairman of the Committee to 
seek permission of Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for the purpose. 
3.  * * * 
4.  The Committee, then, heard the views of the Sec retary, Department of Higher Education on the rationale 
and scope of various provisions of the Educational Tribunals Bill, 2010. The Chairman and members rais ed 
certain queries which were replied to by the witnes ses. The Committee decided to send a questionnaire to the 
Department for written replies within a fortnight. 
5.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.  
6.  The Committee adjourned at 5.40 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
XXVII 
TWENTY - SEVENTH MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 11th August, 
2010 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman  
 2. Shri N .K. Singh 
 3. Shri M. Rama Jois 
 4. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare  
 5. Shri N. Balaganga 
 6. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
  LOK SABHA  
 7. Shri Suresh Angadi 
 8. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson  
 9. Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar 
 10. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
 11. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav  
 12. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 
 13. Shri Tapas Paul 
 14. Shri Joseph Toppo 
 15. Shri P. Viswanathan 
 16. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional, Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the member s to the meeting of the Committee to discuss the 
Educational Tribunals Bill, 2010. The Chairman sought the suggestions/views of the members on the feedback 
received through the memoranda from various organiz ations/ individuals and the replies to the question naire 
received from the Department of Higher Education. He wanted the members to firm up the observations of the 
Committee on the Bill. The Committee, then delibera ted on the documents before it and directed the 
Secretariat to draft the report for its consideration in its next meeting so that the final report could be presented 
to both Houses during the ongoing Monsoon Session of Parliament. 

3.  The Committee adjourned at 4.40 P.M. to meet again on Wednesday, the 18th August, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
XXVIII 
TWENTY - EIGHTH MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 18th August, 
2010 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman  
 2. Shri M. Rama Jois 
 3. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 4. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
 5. Shri N. Balaganga 
 6. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
  LOK  SABHA  
 7. Shri P.K. Biju 
 8. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson  
 9. Shri Prasanta Kumar Mazumdar  
 10. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 
 11. Shri Tapas Paul 
 12. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
 13. Shri Joseph Toppo 
 14. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional, Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2.  Welcoming the members to the meeting of the Com mittee, the Chairman apprised them of the agenda for 
the day. He sought their views on both pieces of legislation. 
3.   The Committee, first, considered the draft 225 th Report on the Educational Tribunals Bill, 2010 a nd 
adopted the same with certain modifications. The Co mmittee decided to present the Report to both House s of 
Parliament on 20th August, 2010. It was decided that while Shri Oscar Fernandes, Chairman of the Committee 
and in his absence, Dr. Janardhan Waghmare will pre sent the Report in Rajya Sabha, Shri Ashok Tanwar, and 
in his absence, Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey will lay the Report in Lok Sabha. 

4.  * * * 
5.  The Committee adjourned at 6.00 P.M. to meet again on Thursday, the 26th August, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 