178th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/178threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
HUNDRED SEVENTY – EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY
BILL, 2006
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23RD NOVEMBER, 2006)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 23RD NOVEMBER, 2006)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2006/AGRAHAYANA, 1928 (SAKA)
 
C O N T E N T S
            1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                    
            2.INTRODUCTION                                                                    
            3. REPORT                                                                                                  
            4.  OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
            5.  MINUTES                                     
6. The National Institutes of Technology
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2006-07)
 
1.            Shri Janardan Dwivedi                       ¾                    Chairman
            MEMBERS    
RAJYA SABHA
2.            Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3.            Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4.            Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
5.            Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
6.            Shri Uday Pratap Singh
7.            Smt. Brinda Karat
8.            Shri S. Anbalagan
9.            Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
10.        Shri Ali Anwar
  LOK SABHA
11.        Shri Ashok Argal
12.        Shri Basudeb Barman
13.        Shri Harishchandra Chavan
14.        Shri Harisinh Chavda
15.        Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan

178th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/178threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
16.        Shri R. L. Jalappa
17.        Shri Ramswaroop Koli
18.        Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
19.        Shri Manjunath Kunnur
20.        Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
21.        Smt. Archana Nayak
22.        Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
23.        Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
24.        Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
25.        Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
26.        Shri Chengara Surendran
27.        Dr. Thokchom Meinya
28.        Shri K. Virupakshappa
29.        Dr. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
30.        Vacant
31.        Vacant
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2005-06)
           
1. @Shri Janardan Dwivedi           ¾        Chairman
 
MEMBERS
      RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3. *Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4. @@Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
5. **Shrimati Chandra Kala Pandey
6. ^ Shrimati Brinda Karat
7.       Shri S. Anbalagan
8. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
9. ^^Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
10. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
11. ^^Shri Anil Dhirubhai Ambani
12. ***Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
13. ***Shri Ali Anwar
LOK SABHA
14. Shri Basudeb Barman
15. Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
16. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
17. Shri R. L. Jalappa
18. Shri Ramswarup Koli
19. Shri Manjunath Kunnur
20. $Shri Y.G. Mahajan
21. $Shri Manoj Kumar
22. %Shri Babu Lal Marandi
23. Dr. Thokchom Meinya
24.   Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
25. Mohd. Mukim
26. Shri Tukaram Ganpatrao Rengepatil
27. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
28. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
29. Shri Tufani Saroj
30. Smt. P. Satheedevi

178th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/178threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
31. Shri A.R. Shaheen
32. Smt. Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
33. Shri K. Virupaxappa
34. Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
35. %%Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
 
@appointed as Chairman w.e.f. 24.3.2006 on the vacancy caused due to the relinquishment of Chairmanship by Shri Vayalar
Ravi w.e.f 29.1.2006 consequent on his induction into the Union Cabinet
*nominated w.e.f .23.8.2005
@@ Ceased to be a member of the Committee on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f 2.4.2006
** Ceased to be a member of the Committee on expiry of her term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f.18.8.2005
^nominated w.e.f. 25.9.2005
^^ Ceased to be member w.e.f. 27th March, 2006
***nominated w.e.f. 6.6.2006
$ Ceased to be member w.e.f. 23rd December, 2005.
% Ceased to be member w.e.f. 22nd May, 2006.
%%nominated w.e.f 31st May, 2006
^^ Ceased to be a member of the Committee on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f.1.7.2006
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji, B., Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development,
having been authorised by the Committee, do hereby present this Hundred Seventy-Eighth Report of the Committee on
the National Institutes of Technology Bill, 2006 of the Department of Secondary & Higher Education, Ministry of
Human Resource Development.
2.         In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee, The Chairman,
Rajya Sabha had referred the National Institutes of Technology Bill, 2006, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 22nd
May, 2006 and pending therein, to the Committee for examination and report.
3.         The Committee considered various documents and relevant papers received from the Department of Secondary &
Higher Education, and also heard the Secretary and other officials of that Department on the said Bill in its meeting held
on 13
th June, 19th July and 8th September, 2006.
4.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on the 8 th September,
2006.
NEW DELHI;
September 8, 2006
Bhadrapad 17, 1928 (Saka)
JANARDAN DWIVEDI
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development
REPORT
 
1.         Eight Regional Engineering Colleges (RECs), two in each regions-east, west, north and south, were set up in
early sixties as joint and co-operative ventures of the Central and State Governments concerned with a view to providing
the required technical manpower for the industrial projects being contemplated during the 2nd Five-Year Plan (1956-61).
These institutes were registered as autonomous bodies under the Society Registration Act 1860 and affiliated to the State
Universities in their respective regions. Gradually, 17 RECs were set up in the country.
2.         Main aim of setting up the RECs was to create the required technical manpower by providing undergraduate
education and training in different branches of engineering & technology. Further the RECs were also envisaged to

178th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/178threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
function as pace setters and to provide academic leadership to the technical institutions in their respective regions.
3.         The Programme of Action (POA), 1992 of the National Policy on Education, 1986, had recommended that "in
order to enable the RECs to effectively act as pace setting institutes and to provide leadership to the technical education
institutes in respective regions, steps will be taken to give maximum autonomy and detailed review will be conducted for
deciding the future thought and orientation so as to broaden their horizon by improving the existing management
structure." The Union Government accordingly, set up a High Powered Review Committee (HPRC) under the
Chairmanship of Dr. R.A. Mashelkar, Director-General, Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR) in 1996.
4.         The High Powered Review Committee submitted its report entitled "Strategic Road Map for Academic
Excellence of Future RECs" in 1998. The main recommendations of HPRC were as follows:-
 
(a)        The Institutes be empowered to award degrees through an Act of Parliament.
(b)        The Chairman of the Board should be a non-official of eminence and that he/she must not hold any
statutory powers of execution in the RECs.
(c)        The Head of the Institute should be a person of distinction in Engineering and Technology who, apart
from leading the Institute, will provide its public face.
(d)        The demand for new RECs may be examined on a case to case basis.
(e)        RECs should be encouraged to admit foreign and NRI students, both in undergraduate and postgraduate
programmes. These students be admitted against seats in addition to the seats meant for Indian Students.
 
5.         After due consultation with the State Governments, the Government of India decided to convert these RECs into
National Institutes of Technology (NITs) with the status of a Deemed to be University and structural changes in
governance. The Union Cabinet accorded its approval on February 19, 2003 for taking over the 17 RECs as NITs and
make them fully funded Institutes of the Central Government. The Cabinet in its meeting held on November 6, 2003
decided to upgrade the Bihar College of Engineering, Patna to the status of an NIT with full Central funding.
Subsequently, the Cabinet also cleared two proposals for converting Government Engineering College, Raipur and
Tripura Engineering College, Agartala to that of NITs in its meetings held on November 10, 2005 and February 23, 2006
respectively, thereby enhancing total number of NITs to 20 in the country.
6.         The philosophy behind making NITs as fully funded institutes of the Central Government was to upgrade them as
National Centres of Excellence for developing technical manpower, create conducive work atmosphere and provide
academic autonomy. The annual intake in all NITs since the take over has gone up substantially both at Undergraduate
and Postgraduate level of engineering & technology. The annual intake at UG level has increased from 5800 to 7200
while in PG it has gone up from about 1500 to 2500. Besides, the increase in intake, NITs have also started introducing
many new courses in emerging areas of science & technology such as bio-technology. Nationwide, NITs are a preferred
destination of students after IITs. These Institutes therefore need to be strengthened further.
 
7.         The proposed National Institutes of Technology Bill, 2006 brings all the NITs under its ambit. The Committee
was informed that this Bill was being proposed in the light of the following reasons:-
 
(a)        The High Power Review Committee (HPRC) had recommended that these institutes be developed as
autonomous and flexible academic institutions of excellence to enable them to function most effectively
through responsive and relevant academic programmes in the light of sweeping changes taking place in
the industrial environment in post liberalized India and rapidly changing scene of technical education
globally. Additionally, the new national perspective on technology, as a key instrument of development
and growth, needed to be embodied in the very character and functions of NITs.
 
(b)        There are seven IITs in the country and all of them are functioning under an umbrella Act viz; the
Institutes of Technology Act, 1961. On a similar pattern, it is proposed to bring all the NITs under an
umbrella legislation. Therefore, the proposed Bill would provide necessary legal framework in designing
a robust structure for governance and development.
(c)        The proposed Bill will also help and encourage the NITs to become "centres of excellence".
(d)        The proposed Bill would enhance the status of NITs and give a boost to Post Graduate technical
education and research.
(e)        The proposed Bill will provide academic, administrative and financial autonomy to these Institutes.
 

178th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/178threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
8.         The Committee asked if all the NITs could be brought under the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961, because
having two sets of similar Acts might not be that fruitful an exercise. The Committee, was informed by the
representatives of the Department that since the IITs had gained an international repute whereas, the NITs are still to
attain this status, it would be not proper to place the NITs also under the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961. The
Committee was informed that there were substantial differences between the two categories of technical Institutes. IITs
have a specialized high level entrance examination and are funded on a very different scale. Apprehensions were voiced
that brand equity of IITs may be adversely affected, given the differences in their evolution, extent of funding
methodology and composition of student intake.
9.         The Committee observes that NITs also have a Region/State specific focus as they cater to the needs of the local
industry. In the governance structure that is envisaged in the Bill, NITs would have enough autonomy to maintain their
individuality.   Taking note of the fact that NITs have their own admission policies as far as giving specific preference to
local students is concerned, the Committee enquired about the impact of the Bill on the interests of local students. The
Committee is happy to note that the existing admission policy would continue under the proposed Act and there would
be no change in the composition of the student intake. It believes that the NITs will develop and grow faster separately
than with the IITs. In this backdrop the Committee suggests following amendments in the Bill:-
Clause 5 (d)
 
10.       The Committee is of the considered opinion that the Clause 5 (d) allows a status quo and takes away any
possibility of improvement in service conditions of the employees of NITs as regards pension, leave, gratuity, Provident
fund and other. The Committee recommends that the service conditions of the employees should have uniform
application in all the NITs.  Accordingly, the Department should bring necessary change in the clause with a view to
ensuring uniformity in service conditions, pensions etc. in all the Institutes.
11.       The Committee is also wary of the words “duly altered by the statutes” in page 2, line 45 of Clause 5 (d).  The
Committee feels that this provides scope to alter to the disadvantage of the tenure employees in terms of their
remuneration and conditions of service.  The Committee recommends that it must be ensured that alteration in service
conditions should not be to the disadvantage of the employees.  Accordingly, clause 5 (d) may be redrafted.
12.       Committee has been informed that at present employees of 17 NITs are enjoying the facility of Pension Scheme
and GPF Scheme. Employees of the three remaining NITs i.e.,  Kurukshetra, Jalandhar and Silchar are not getting this
facility. A representation was also received by the Committee from the Chairman, Board of Governors, NIT,
Kurukshetra requesting for bringing parity in the NITs so far as Pension/GPF was concerned. On a specific query in this
regard, the Committee was informed that as per the Fourth Pay Commission recommendations Pension Scheme on the
pattern of Central Government Rules was extended to Central autonomous organizations by the Central Government,
State Governments were responsible to take decision on introduction of Pension Scheme in the RECs. All the State
Governments except Punjab, Haryana and Assam have introduced Pension Scheme in the RECs. The Committee has
been given to understand that the reason for non-introduction of Pension Scheme the three RECs might be huge financial
implications on the part of respective State Governments.
13.       The Committee notes that all the 17 RECs were converted into NITs by granting them Deemed to be University
Status with 100% central funding from the financial year 2003-04. On the request of the three NITs, the issue of
introduction of Pension Scheme was referred to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) on 8
th March,
2004. The proposal was, however, not found acceptable. Reason given was that with the introduction of new pension
scheme from 1
st January, 2004, permission to any autonomous body to introduce Pension Scheme on Government of
India pattern would not be appropriate.
 
14.       The Committee is not fully convinced by the justification given by the Ministry of Finance. From the papers
submitted to the Committee, it is evident that the respective Board of Governors of all the three RECs of Jalandhar,
Kurukshetra and Silchar had approved introduction of Pension/GPF Scheme for their employees at the right time, which
could not materialize due to financial constraints of the State Governments. The Committee strongly feels that the
Pension Scheme should be made applicable to all the NITs only exception being those employees who joined service on
or after 01.01.2004. All the RECs after getting the status of NITs have the same mandate and enjoy the same status and
perform the same functions. This uniformity should be extended to the service conditions of employees also. One time
exception can be made and the Department should pursue this issue if need be, at the highest level so that rightful
demands of employees of NITs of Kurukshetra, Jalandhar and Silchar are accepted.
Clause 6 
15.       The Committee recommends that a new sub clause enabling the Institutes to undertake consultancy in the areas/

178th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/178threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
disciplines relevant to the Institutes may be added.
Clause 6 (1) (n)  
16.       Clause 6 relates to powers of Institutes.  As per Clause 6 (1) (n), the Institute shall have the power "to do all such
things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or any of the objects of the Institute".  The
Committee finds that objects of the NITs have not been given in the Bill. The Committee is of the considered opinion
that objects of the Institute be clearly defined in the Bill itself at appropriate place.
Clause 9 (3)
17.       As per clause 9(3), the Institute shall be bound to comply with the directions issued by the Visitor. However, no
time-frame has been indicated. The Committee therefore, recommends that the words “within reasonable time” may be
added in page 4, line 9 of Clause 9 (3) after the words “.... with such directions”.
Clause 11
18.       The Committee is of the considered opinion that state’s say in representation in BOG appears to be negligible in
the Bill.  The Committee recommends that suitable addition be made for consultation with State Governments in Clause
11.
Clause 11 (a)
19.       Clause 11 specifies the composition of the Board of Governors.The Committee is of the view that the
Chairperson of the Board of Governor should be an eminent person in the technical field.  The Committee recommends
that this fact must be mentioned appropriately in clause 11 (a) itself.
Clause 11 (f)
20.       As per clause 11 (f), two professors of the Institute to be nominated by the Senate will be members of the Board
of Governors. The Committee recommends that instead of two professors, one Professor and one Reader/Lecturer may
be nominated to the Board of Governors. Clause 11 (f) may be modified accordingly.
Clause 12 (c)
21.       The Committee notes that the term of office of a member nominated under clause (f) of Section 11 shall be two
years from the 1st day of January of the year in which he is nominated.  The logic behind giving a retrospective effect to
terms of office of such members nominated under clause (f) of Section 11 is not clear.  The Committee recommends that
the term of office of a member nominated under clause (f) of Section 11 shall be made two years from the date of his/her
nomination.
Clause 12 (f)
22.       The Committee notes that Clause 12 (f) allows an outgoing member to continue in office until another person is
nominated as a member in his place.  The Committee is of considered view that this provision leaves possibility of
making delay in the nomination of a new member for extraneous considerations.  The Committee recommends that the
Bill should clearly specify maximum period in which such nomination has to be done.  The Committee recommends that
insertion to this effect be made in the Bill at appropriate places.
Clause 13 (2) (f)
23.       Clause 13 (2) (f) requires the Board to submit the annual report, the annual accounts and the budget estimates of
the Institute for the next financial year together with a statement of its development plans to the Council.  The
Committee feels that it would be better if this power of the Council were a little moderated. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the words “and the Council shall ordinarily accept the statement made to it” be added after the words
“…development plans” in page 5, line 15 of Clause 13 (2) (f).
Clause 14 (d)
24.       Clause 14 provides for the constitution of the Senate. As per sub-clause (d), three persons, not being employees
of the Institute are to be nominated by the Chairperson in consultation with the Director. The Committee strongly feels
that under this category, one member should be a woman.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the words
“one of whom to be woman” may be added after the words “three persons” in page 5, line 25 of clause 14 (d).
Clause 14 (e)
25.       The Committee recommends that the Statutes must provide for the representation of students in the Senate.  The
Committee accordingly, recommends that the words “and students” be added after the words “…of the Staff” in page 5,
line 28 of clause 14 (e).
26.       The Committee further recommends that the Statutes in this regard must also provide for election of staff and
students on the Senate. The staff and students should be elected rather than being nominated on the Senate. 
Clause 17
27.       Clause 17 pertains to Director and Deputy Director of Institute.  The Committee finds no mention of the term of
office of the Director and Deputy Director.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a term of five years may be

178th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/178threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
specified for the Director and Deputy Director in Clause 17 of the Bill.
Clause 18
28.       The Committee also finds no mention of the term of office of the Registrar.  The Committee is of the considered
opinion that the Registrar should be taken on deputation for a period of three years.  The Committee, accordingly,
recommends the Department to redraft Clause 18 suitably.
Clause 25
29.       Clause 25 provides for the items on which the Statutes may be made by an Institute.  The Committee has the
impression that through this Bill, the Institutes are being provided with uniform management/administrative structure,
service conditions, rules and regulations and procedure for appointment of employee, pensions, etc.  However, the
Committee is of the opinion that Clause 25(g) leaves the possibility of difference in service conditions of the employees
in different Institutes.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 25 (g) be suitably amended in the Bill so that
there is uniformity on the subject contained in Clause 25 (g) across the board.
 
30.       The Committee also takes note of Clause 25 (n) whereunder matters regarding the meetings of the Board, the
Senate, or any Committee, the quorum at such meetings and the procedure to be followed in the conduct of their business
is to be laid down in the Statutes. The Committee is of the view that the subject matter contained in Clause 25 (n) be
placed in the Bill itself and laid out clearly. Necessary amendments may, accordingly, be made in the Bill.
Clause 26(1)
 
31.       Clause 26 deals with the procedure regarding the making of statutes.  Clause 26 (1) entails that the first statutes
of each Institute shall be framed by the Central Government with the prior approval of the Visitor. The Committee notes
that under the IIT Act, 1961, the first Statutes of each Institute shall be framed by the Council with the previous approval
of the Visitor. The Committee is of the view that same provision should be there the NIT Act also.  The Committee
accordingly, recommends that the words “Central Government” be substituted by the word ‘Council’ in page 7, line 33
of clause 26 (1).
Clause 29
32.       Clause 29 relates to Tribunal of Arbitration.  The Committee considers the redressal of grievances of employees
paramount to the principles of justice and equity.  The Committee finds that as per clause 29 (1) any dispute out of a
contract between an Institute and any of its employees shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance
of the Institute be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration.  The Committee is of the considered opinion that the option
granted to the Institute to refer the dispute for arbitration can be exploited against the wishes of the aggrieved employee
who might be inclined to approach the court.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words “or at the instance
of the Institute” may be deleted from page 8, line 26 of clause 29 (1).
33.       The Committee also notes that according to sub-clause (2) of this Clause, the decision of the Tribunal of
Arbitration shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court.  This sub-clause gives an impression that the
employees were debarred from all other judicial remedies against the decision of the Tribunal.  The Committee is aware
that no Act can debar the remedies available under Articles 226 and 32 of the Constitution.  The Bill also doesn’t intend
to do this.  The Committee, however, recommends that the following Explanation may be added in the said sub-clause
for removing the erroneous impression in this regard.
            “This does not preclude the employees from availing the remedies provided for under Articles 226 & 32 of the
Constitution.”
 
Chapter III - The Council
Clause 30
34.       Clauses 30 to 34 under chapter III deal with the establishment of the Council, its terms of office, vacancies
among, and allowances payable to members, its functions, rule making power. However, there is no stipulation regarding
the minimum number of times the council shall meet every year.  The Committee recommends that the Department may
suitably redraft the Bill to ensure that the Council meets at least once every year.
Clause 35 (a)
35.       The Committee notes that Clause 35 (a) saves acts and proceedings of the Council, or any Institute or Board or
Senate on the ground of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution there of.  The Committee is of the considered
opinion that saving any act or proceeding of a body despite a defect in its constitution is likely to be misused. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that this provision may be redrafted suitably so that no act or proceeding gets
validated despite a defect in the constitution of any decision-making bodies or any defect in the election, nomination or

178th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/178threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
appointment of a person acting as a member of these bodies.
           
36.       The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any amendments.
            37.       The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
            38.       The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the amendment additions
suggested by it. 
            39.       The Committee would like the Department to submit a note with reasons on the
recommendations/suggestions, which could not be incorporated in the Bill.
 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
Clause 5 (d)
 
            The Committee recommends that the service conditions of the employees should have uniform application in all
the NITs.  Accordingly, the Department should bring necessary change in the clause with a view to ensuring uniformity
in service conditions, pensions etc. in all the Institutes.                   (Para 10)
 
            The Committee is also wary of the words “duly altered by the statutes” in page 2, line 45 of Clause 5 (d).  The
Committee feels that this provides scope to alter to the disadvantage of the tenure employees in terms of their
remuneration and conditions of service.  The Committee recommends that it must be ensured that alteration in service
conditions should not be to the disadvantage of the employees.  Accordingly, clause 5 (d) may be redrafted.
                          (Para 11)
 
            The Committee notes that all the 17 RECs were converted into NITs by granting them Deemed to be University
Status with 100% central funding from the financial year 2003-04. On the request of the three NITs, the issue of
introduction of Pension Scheme was referred to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) on 8
th March,
2004. The proposal was, however, not found acceptable. Reason given was that with the introduction of new pension
scheme from 1 st January, 2004, permission to any autonomous body to introduce Pension Scheme on Government of
India pattern would not be appropriate.
 
            The Committee strongly feels that the Pension Scheme should be made applicable to all the NITs only exception
being those employees who joined service on or after 01.01.2004. All the RECs after getting the status of NITs have the
same mandate and enjoy the same status and perform the same functions. This uniformity should be extended to the
service conditions of employees also. One time exception can be made and the Department should pursue this issue if
need be, at the highest level so that rightful demands of employees of NITs of Kurukshetra, Jalandhar and Silchar are
accepted.                                                            (Para 14)
Clause 6 
 
            The Committee recommends that a new sub clause enabling the Institutes to undertake consultancy in the areas/
disciplines relevant to the Institutes may be added.                                                         (Para15)
Clause 6 (1) (n)  
            The Committee is of the considered opinion that objects of the Institute be clearly defined in the Bill itself at
appropriate place.
(Para16)
Clause 9 (3)
            As per clause 9(3), the Institute shall be bound to comply with the directions issued by the Visitor. However, no
time-frame has been indicated. The Committee therefore, recommends that the words “within reasonable time” may be
added in page 4, line 9 of Clause 9 (3) after the words “.... with such directions”.                                     (Para 17)
Clause 11
            The Committee is of the considered opinion that state’s say in representation in BOG appears to be negligible in
the Bill.  The Committee recommends that suitable addition be made for consultation with State Governments in Clause
11.                                                            (Para 18)
Clause 11 (a)

178th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/178threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
            Clause 11 specifies the composition of the Board of Governors. The Committee is of the view that the
Chairperson of the Board of Governor should be an eminent person in the technical field.  The Committee recommends
that this fact must be mentioned appropriately in clause 11 (a) itself.               (Para 19)
Clause 11 (f)
            The Committee recommends that instead of two professors, one Professor and one Reader/Lecturer may be
nominated to the Board of Governors. Clause 11 (f) may be modified accordingly.         (Para 20)
Clause 12 (c)
 
            The Committee recommends that the term of office of a member nominated under clause (f) of Section 11 shall
be made two years from the date of his/her nomination.                                                      (Para 21)
Clause 12 (f)
 
            The Committee recommends that the Bill should clearly specify maximum period in which such nomination has
to be done.  The Committee recommends that insertion to this effect be made in the Bill at appropriate
places.                                                                                    (Para 22)
Clause 13 (2) (f)
            The Committee feels that it would be better if this power of the Council were a little moderated. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the words “and the Council shall ordinarily accept the statement made to it” be added after
the words “…development plans” in page 5, line 15 of Clause 13 (2) (f).                                         (Para 23)
Clause 14 (d)
            Clause 14 provides for the constitution of the Senate. As per sub-clause (d), three persons, not being employees
of the Institute are to be nominated by the Chairperson in consultation with the Director. The Committee strongly feels
that under this category, one member should be a woman.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the words
“one of whom to be woman” may be added after the words “three persons” in page 5, line 25 of clause 14 (d).
                                            (Para 24)
Clause 14 (e)
            The Committee recommends that the Statutes must provide for the representation of students in the Senate.  The
Committee accordingly, recommends that the words “and students” be added after the words “…of the Staff” in page 5,
line 28 of clause 14 (e).
(Para 25)
            The Committee further recommends that the Statutes in this regard must also provide for election of staff and
students on the Senate. The staff and students should be elected rather than being nominated on the Senate. 
                                                                   (Para 26)
Clause 17
            The Committee, therefore, recommends that a term of five years may be specified for the Director and Deputy
Director in Clause 17 of the Bill.                                                                                                            (Para 27)
Clause 18
            The Committee is of the considered opinion that the Registrar should be taken on deputation for a period of three
years.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department to redraft Clause 18 suitably.                                    
                                                                        (Para 28)
Clause 25
            The Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 25 (g) be suitably amended in the Bill so that there is
uniformity on the subject contained in Clause 25 (g) across the board.                                    (Para 29)
            The Committee also takes note of Clause 25 (n) whereunder matters regarding the meetings of the Board, the
Senate, or any Committee, the quorum at such meetings and the procedure to be followed in the conduct of their business
is to be laid down in the Statutes. The Committee is of the view that the subject matter contained in Clause 25 (n) be
placed in the Bill itself and laid out clearly. Necessary amendments may, accordingly, be made in the Bill.(Para 30)
Clause 26(1)
              The Committee accordingly, recommends that the words “Central Government” be substituted by the word
‘Council’ in page 7, line 33 of clause 26 (1).                                                                                 (Para 31)
Clause 29
 
            The Committee is of the considered opinion that the option granted to the Institute to refer the dispute for
arbitration can be exploited against the wishes of the aggrieved employee who might be inclined to approach the court. 

178th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/178threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words “or at the instance of the Institute” may be deleted from page 8,
line 26 of clause 29 (1).                                                             (Para 32)
            The Committee, however, recommends that the following Explanation may be added in the said sub-clause for
removing the erroneous impression in this regard.                                              
            “This does not preclude the employees from availing the remedies provided for under Articles 226 & 32 of the
Constitution.”
(Para 33)
Chapter III - The Council
Clause 30
            The Committee recommends that the Department may suitably redraft the Bill to ensure that the Council meets at
least once every year.
(Para 34)
Clause 35 (a)
            The Committee is of the considered opinion that saving any act or proceeding of a body despite a defect in its
constitution is likely to be misused. The Committee, therefore, recommends that this provision may be redrafted suitably
so that no act or proceeding gets validated despite a defect in the constitution of any decision-making bodies or any
defect in the election, nomination or appointment of a person acting as a member of these bodies.
                                                                 (Para 35)
           
            The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any amendments.
            The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
            The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the amendment additions suggested
by it. 
            The Committee would like the Department to submit a note with reasons on the recommendations/suggestions,
which could not be incorporated in the Bill.
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 13
th June, 2006 in
Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Janardan Dwivedi              ¾                    Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3.         Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
Smt. Brinda Karat
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
LOK SABHA
Shri Basudeb Barman
Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
Shri Ramswarup Koli
Shri Manjunath Kunnur
Dr. Thokchom Meinya
Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
Shri Tukaram Ganpatrao Rengepatil
Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat

178th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/178threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
Smt. P. Satheedevi
Shri A.R. Shaheen
Smt. Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
Shri K. Virupaxappa
Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
 
 
WITNESSES
DEPARTMENT OF SECONDARY AND HIGHER EDUCATION
 
1.         Shri K.M. Acharya                               Additional Secretary
2.         Shri Sunil Kumar                                  Joint Secretary
3.         Shri Ravi Mathur                                  Joint Secretary
4.         Shri G.L. Jambulkar                              Deputy Education Advisor
5.         Shri R.D. Sahay                                    Deputy Secretary
           
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the three new Members who were recently nominated to the Committee.
The Committee then heard the Additional Secretary and other officials, Department of Secondary and Higher Education
on “The Central Institute of English and Foreign Languages University Bill, 2006” and “The National Institutes of
Technology Bill, 2006”.
 
3.         The Members raised a number of queries on both the Bills, some of which were replied to by the witnesses. The
Committee felt that further discussion was required to better appreciate the two Bills and decided to send another set of
Questionnaire for the written comments of the Department.
 
4.         The Committee decided to seek further extension of time up to the last day of the next Session i.e. Monsoon
Session of the Parliament for presentation of its Report on “the Central Institute of English and Foreign Languages
University Bill, 2006” which was referred to the Committee on 27
th March 2006 for examination and report within three
months, i.e., by 26th June 2006.
 
5.         The Chairman also informed the Members that the `Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2006’ has
been referred to the Committee on 1st June, 2006 for examination and report within three months. Keeping in view the
wider ramifications of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue a Press Release inviting comments on the Bill from all
concerned.
 
6.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 1.40 p.m.
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
XXI
TWENTY-FIRST MEETING
 
            The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 19
th July, 2006 in
Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
 

178th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/178threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
Shri Janardan Dwivedi              ¾                    Chairman
 
            RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
Smt. Brinda Karat
Shri S. Anbalagan
Shri Uday Pratap Singh
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
 Shri Ali Anwar
 
            LOK SABHA
 
Shri Basudeb Barman
Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
Shri R. L. Jalappa
Shri Ramswarup Koli
Dr. Thokchom Meinya
Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
Shri Mohd. Mukim
Shri Tukaram Ganpatrao Rengepatil
Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
Shri Tufani Saroj
Smt. P. Satheedevi
Shri A.R. Shaheen
Smt. Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
Shri K. Virupaxappa
Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji.B., Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
WITNESSES
DEPARTMENT OF SECONDARY AND HIGHER EDUCATION
 
1.         Shri Sunil Kumar                      Joint Secretary
2.         Shri R.D. Sahay                        Deputy Secretary
3.         Shri S.S. Mahlawat                   Under Secretary
 
2.         The Committee took up for consideration the draft report on “The Central Institute of English and Foreign
Languages University Bill, 2006”.  The Committee suggested amendments/deletion in the Clauses 1(1), 3(1), 6(viii),
30(1)(j), 35(3), 39 and 46 of the Bill and Clauses 6, 7(b), (c), and (d), 17 and 37 of the Statutes contained in the Schedule
of the Bill. The Members also sought clarifications from the representatives of the Department to which they replied.  
The Committee, thereafter, adopted the draft report with some modifications.
3.         The Committee authorized the Chairman to fix a suitable date to present/lay the Report in the monsoon session of
Parliament and also nominate members from both the houses to present/lay the report.
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 12.50 p.m.

178th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/178threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
                                                                                          I
                                                                          FIRST MEETING
         The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 a.m. on Friday, the 8 th September 2006 in
Committee Room `A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
          MEMBERS  PRESENT
Shri Janardan Dwivedi              ¾                    Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
Smt. Brinda Karat
Shri Uday Pratap Singh
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
Shri Ali Anwar
LOK SABHA
Shri Ashok Argal
Shri Basudeb Barman
Shri Harishchandra Chavan
Shri Harisinh Chavda
Shri R. L. Jalappa
Shri Ramswaroop Koli
Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
Dr. Thokchom Meinya
Shri K. Virupakshappa
Dr. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
Shri Anantkumar Hegde
  
            SECRETARIAT
   
            Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
            Shri N.K. Singh, Director
            Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
            Shri Swarabji  B., Committee Officer
   
WITNESSES
            Department of Secondary and Higher Education
 
1.         Shri N.K. Sinha                        Joint Secretary
2.         Shri G.L. Jambulkar                  Deputy Education Advisor
            Legislative Department
1.         Shri S.R. Dhaleta                      Joint Secretary & Legal Consultant
2.         Miss Reeta Vashista                 Dy. Legal Consultant
 
2.         The Chairman welcomed the Members and informed the Committee that ‘Central Educational Institutions
(Reservation in Admission) Bill, 2006’ has been referred to the Committee for examination and report within three
months. Thereafter, the Committee took up Clause-by-Clause consideration of "The National Institutes of Technology
Bill, 2006". The Committee suggested amendments/deletion in the Clauses 5(d), 6, 6(1)(k), 9(3), 11(a), 11(d), 11(e),

178th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/178threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
11(f), 12(c), 12(f), 13(2)(f), 14(d), 14(e), 17, 18, 25(g), 25(n), 26(1), 29(1), 29(2), 30(2)(i) and 35(a) of the Bill and
adopted the Report after incorporating the said suggestions.
The Committee also thanked the representatives of the Department of Secondary and Higher Education and the Ministry
of Law and Justice Legislative Department for their assistance.
3.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 12.50 p.m. to meet again at 11:00 a.m. on 18
th September, 2006.