147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
HUNDRED – FORTY  SEVENTH  REPORT
 
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
HUNDRED FORTY  FIRST  REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS, 2003-2004, (DEMAND NO. 103) OF
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2003)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2003/ AGRAHAYANA, 1925 (SAKA)
 
 
C O N T E N T S
 
1. Composition Of The Committee
2. Preface
3. Report 
 CHAPTER  I   Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government     
 CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s reply
 CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not
been accepted
 CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government are still
awaited
4. Observations/recommendations at a glance
5. Minutes
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2003)
 
1. Shri Arjun Singh              ¾¾                Chairman
 
MEMBERS
            RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Dr. Abrar Ahmed
3. Dr. Akhilesh Das
4. Shri B.P. Apte 
5. Shri Bachani Lekhraj
6. Shri Eduardo Faleiro

147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
7. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
8. Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik
9. Shri Lalhmingliana
10. Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey
11. Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav Ravi
12. Shri R. Sarath Kumar
13. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
14. ^Shri Mrinal Sen
15. Smt. Vanga Geetha
16. *Shri Dara Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
17. Shri Ambareesha
18. Shri Ramakant Angle
19. Shri Kirti Jha Azad
20. Shri G. S. Basavaraj
21. Shri Ram Rati Bind
22. Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria
23. Prof. Kailasho Devi
24. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
25. Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit
26. Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
27. Shri R.L. Jalappa
28. Shri Baliram Kashyap
29. Shri Brij Lal Khabri
30. Shri Samik Lahiri
31. Shri Y.G. Mahajan
32. #Shri  G.Mallikarjunappa
33. Dr. Manda Jagannath
34. Smt. Nivedita Mane
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
^ Ceased to be member w.e.f.26th August, 2003
*  Nominated   w.e.f. 26th September, 2003.
# Died on 30th November, 2003.
 
 
35    ^Shrimati Jas Kaur Meena
36    Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
37    Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
38    Smt. Kumudini Patnaik
39    Smt. Renu Kumari
40    Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao
41    Shri Sunil Dutt
42    Shri Ramsheth Thakur
43    Dr. N. Venkataswamy
44    Smt. Ganti Vijaykumari
45    Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
46    *Shri G.J. Javia
47    *Shri Ali Mohammed Naik
 
SECRETARIAT
 

147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
^ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 29
th   January, 2003
*  Nominated   w.e.f. 7th April, 2003.
 
 
PREFACE
 
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this
Hundred-Forty Seventh Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations contained in its Hundred
Forty First Report onDemands for Grants (Demand No.103) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports for the year
2003-2004.
2.         The Hundred Forty First Report  of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23
rd  April, 2003. 
Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report received from the Ministry of Youth Affairs
and Sports were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the December 9, 2003. 
 
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on  December 9,  2003.
 
NEWDELHI;
December9,2003
Agrahayana 18, 1925 (Saka
ARJUN SINGH
Chairman
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on  Human Resource Development
REPORT
 
            The Report of the Committee contains response of the Committee to the action taken replies submitted by the
Government on the recommendations/observations  contained in its One Hundred-forty first  Report on Demands for
Grants, 2003-2004, (Demand No. 103) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports.
 
2.         The Action Taken replies  received from the Government have been categorized as follows.   Further comments
of the Committee  wherever felt necessary have also been given.
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:  7,15,16,17  (Chapter I) Total- 4
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies: 5,5,6,9,19  (Chapter II) Total-5
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee: 2,4,10,11,12,14,18 (Chapter-III) Total-7
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited: 13
(Chapter – IV) Total-1

147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
 
 
 
The final replies in respect of the recommendations/observations made in Chapter IV of the Report are still awaited from
the Department. The Committee may be apprised of the same at the earliest opportunity and action thereon needs to be
expedited.
 
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH
HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
7.     NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS)
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee observes it is necessary to have another look on the three tier system to determine the extent to
which it has helped.  The Committee notes that the utilisation of allocated funds under NSS continues to be the
optimum.  The Committee is surprised to learn how in the absence of audited accounts/utilisation certificates, allocation
of funds has been continuing for years together.  The Committee, therefore, is of the view that before going for
enhancement in the scale of assistance for regular activities and special camps under NSS, it is necessary to develop an
effective monitoring system to curb the misuse of expenditure, if any.
 
Action Taken
 
It is through the ‘Three Tier Monitoring Mechanism’ only that NSS programmes are being  monitored 
successfully  at Universities, Colleges and Schools at  +2 level.
 
  The Three-tier Monitoring Mechanism is as under:-
At Ministry level:
         
Every year NSS Grants are released to various States/U.T.s.  The State Govt. is required to furnish the Statement
of Accounts to the Ministry, annually, showing details of NSS Grants (Central + State share) released to various
Universities/Colleges falling under the jurisdiction of respective State/UT.   Ministry is entrusted with the examination
of the statement of accounts furnished by each State/UT and only after having satisfied itself with the performance of
each State/UT, further Grants are released.
 
At the level of Programme Adviser’s Cell:
 
            The Programme Adviser’s Cell is entrusted with the monitoring and implementation of NSS programme in
various States/U.T.s by examining the periodical (quarterly/half-yearly/annual) reports received from the State level
NSS Cell of various States/U.T.s
 
At Regional Centre’s level:
 
          There are 15 NSS Regional Centres covering the entire country which are entrusted with liaison between the
Centre and the State.  These Regional Centres also monitor the release of NSS Grants to various
Univerisities/Colleges/+2 schools by respective States/U.Ts.
Apart from this, officers of the NSS Regional Centres, State Liaison Cells, NSS Programme Co-ordinators visit NSS
Programmes/camps falling under their jurisdiction and send feed-back to NSS Programme Adviser’s Cell/Ministry on a
regular basis. 
 
 Since the inception of the National Service Scheme(NSS) in 1969, with 37 Universities involving 40,000
students,  it has now over 19.00 lakh student
volunteers spread over  more than 176 Universities and 22 Senior Secondary Councils. Since the existing monitoring

147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
mechanism is  working satisfactorily, no need is felt to switch over to some other mechanism.
 
 As a corrective measure, however, NSS grants are now released only to those States/UTs  who regularly  furnish
their statement of accounts to the Ministry in time. From 2001-02,  grants are not being released  to those  States/UTs
who do  not submit the statement of accounts  in  time  and  those  who have sufficient  unspent funds lying with them.
Usually, a two years’ grace period    is given to the States/UTs   for settlement of Accounts.
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should realize the importance of sports and take necessary steps
towards utilization of vast potential manpower of students gainfully either in sports or in completion of projects of
national importance during holidays in forms other than NCC camps.  If dedicated efforts are made, the country can go a
long way in bringing about a change in the sports scenario.
 
The Committee also recommends that purposeful activity should be under taken in these camps so as to prove the
theme of NSS i.e. “Development of the Personality of the Students through Community Service” and also ensure the
physical as well as mental development of participants.  Besides Programmes under NSS should be constantly reviewed
with a view to develop the personality and promote meaningful interaction among students.
 
Action Taken
 
The aim of National Service Scheme(NSS) being “ personality development of students through community
service”,  and keeping in view
academic compulsions, NSS volunteers are engaged in Regular Activities and Special Camping Programmes for a
specific duration only.
 
            Under “Regular Activities”, volunteers are expected to work for a continuous period of two years, rendering
community service for a minimum of 120 hours per annum.    Under “Special Camping Programme”, a camp of 10
days’ duration is conducted every year in the adopted villages/ areas on specific themes like “Youth for Afforestation
and Tree Plantation”, Youth for Mass Literacy”, “Youth for Rural Reconstruction”, “Youth for Development”, “Youth
for Social Harmony”, Youth for Haryali”, etc.  The theme for the current year i.e. 2003-04 is “Youth for Swacchta”
(Cleanliness).
 
            In addition, the volunteers are also made to participate in various  community development  programmes and
activities  which provide them ample opportunities for group-living,  collective experience sharing  and constant
interaction with different communities. Such programmes/activities really help the students  in grooming their
personalities  and channelling their energies in a constructive manner for integrated national development.
 
NSS programmes  are constantly monitored/reviewed  under the‘ Three-tier monitoring mechanism’.  Review
meetings of Heads of Regional Centre/State Liaison Cells are also organized regularly.
 
 
15.
              SPECIAL AREA GAMES
 
 Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee recommends that efforts should also be made to tap potential for swimming in coastal areas, and
archery in tribal areas.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
Special efforts are being made to identify talent in Swimming in coastal areas and special selection trials are
being conducted in this regard.  So far 113 trainees have been identified mostly from coastal areas.  Further the Regional
Heads of SAI are arranging for special talent scouting in the coastal areas for identifying talent in Swimming. 

147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
 
As regards, identification of talent in the discipline of Archery from tribal belt, SAI has conducted a talent
scouting in the tribal area as well from All India Vanvasi Sub-Junior and Junior Tribal Archery Championships during
the month of December, 2002.  One hundred and thirteen Archers were preliminary identified and called for an
assessment camp held at SAI Eastern Centre, Kolkata during the month of April-May, 2003.  After conclusion of the
assessment camp 34 archers (20 boys 14 girls) were selected.  They are being admitted in the various SAI Training
Centres, where Archery is a discipline.
 
16.       ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR PHYSICAL EDUCATION
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
            The Committee welcomes the move of the Ministry for setting up a body of national stature and hopes that the
Council would fulfil the objects for which it is proposed to be set up.  However, the Committee hopes that the proposed
council would not be a mere addition to the existing institutions and would be a specialised body professionally devoted
to its objective.
 
Action taken
 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
 
17.       AFRO - ASIAN GAMES
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee recommends that everything possible should be done to ensure that the games/events are
conducted successfully and no inconvenience is caused to visiting teams/delegations and the event goes down the
memory as a successful event.  Government should also try to have the dope test centre duly accredited by IOC well
before the games start.
 
Action Taken
 
 The smooth conduct of the First Afro Asian Games will be within the domain of the Organizing Committee of
First Afro Asian Games.  However, from the Government side, all possible assistance will be provided to the Organizing
Committee for smooth conduct of the Games.
 
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENTS’ REPLY
 
5.            YOUTH AFFAIRS PROGRAMMES
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee observes that there is an urgent need to address the existing scenario of youth problems which is
reflected in the unlawful activities of misguided youth of the country. Youth power, if directed properly, can change the
socio-economic scenario of the country .Added to this lack of adequate employment opportunities, lack of direction
because of uncertain education system, inability to pursue education because of financial constraints are compelling
youth to take to the crimes to find some easy money to sustain life. In these circumstances, the Committee is constrained
to note that the achievement of targets, both financial and physical, by the youth wing has not been satisfactory. Infact
the budgetary support during Ninth Five Year Plan remained unutilised. Against the approved outlay of Rs.352.24 crores
for the Ninth Plan expenditure incurred amounted to Rs.336.94 crores, The Committee agrees with the view expressed
by the Approach Paper to the Ninth Plan that the social sector programmes have not performed upto the mark. The
Committee is therefore of the view that the monitoring and evaluation system either does not exist and even if it exists,

147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
the findings of it are not being seriously taken. These are the reasons due to which the targets could not be achieved on
both financial and physical fronts. The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry should tighten and strengthen
its monitoring system to ensure achievement of targets. Vital factors like inflation, increasing number of youth and
paramount need to channelise the energies of youth in right direction be kept constantly in view while making
allocations to the Department.
 
Action Taken
 
It is correct that as against the IX Plan outlay of Rs.352.24 crores, for various youth related programmes, the
utilisation was Rs.336.94 crores.  Nevertheless, the utilisation represents 95.65% which can normally be considered a
very high utilisation percentage insofar as social sector schemes are concerned.  It may further be mentioned that the
corresponding physical performance has been quite satisfactory during the same Plan period as would be evident from
the Table below in respect of some major schemes:-
 
Name of the 
Scheme Physical Target Achievement
National Service Scheme Number of volunteers
     78.94 lakhs
Special Camps
     38,167
 
 
77.93 lakhs
 
40,158
 
Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan 75,425 programmes 1,04,810 programmes
 
 
 
Financial Assistance for Promotion of Youth
Activities and Training
Number of Youth beneficiaries
80,975
 
 
 
1,26,019
National Service Volunteer Scheme Number of volunteers
       19,000
 
29,387
 
From the above, it would be seen that the non-utilisation of 100% Plan Outlay during the IX Plan did not result
in a shortfall in physical performance.  The position of financial and physical performance during the first year of the
current plan period was also quite satisfactory.  As against an outlay of 106.98 crores, the actual utilisation was
Rs.100.58 crores which represents an utilisation of 94.02%.  The physical performance under some of the major
schemes was also pretty satisfactory as would be evident from the Table below:-
 
Name of the Scheme Target Achievement
Promotion of National Integration 150 programmes 295 programmes
Promotion of Adventure 75 programmes 137 programmes
Scouting and Guiding 80 programmes 124 programmes
Promotion of Youth Activities and
Training
8,350 youth to be imparted vocational
training
16,936 youths trained
NSS 19.30 lakhs NSS volunteers to be
enrolled
19,18,738 volunteers enrolled
NSVS 5400 volunteers 4,700 volunteers
 
Nevertheless, the Committee’s recommendation regarding tightening and strengthening of its monitoring system to
ensure achievement of targets has been noted for implementation. 
 
5            YOUTH AFFAIRS PROGRAMMES
 
The Committee feels that in order to promote Sports in the country it is necessary to provide adequate incentives,
good job opportunities and recognition of talent and achievements through an independent assessment and honest
promotion of sports. At the same time while it is desirable to enlist cooperation of private sector, it may not be

147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
forthcoming unless this is linked to tax incentives.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted.
 
6.            NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee feels that the activities/programmes undertaken by NYKS were good in promoting communal
harmony but they hardly reach the grass root levels.  Lack of awareness among the people deprived them to fully exploit
the benefits of the programme.  The Committee, therefore, feels that it is necessary to give wide publicity to the
activities of NYKS to invite increased participation.
 
 
Action Taken
 
            NYKS is one of the largest grass-root level organisations in the world catering to the needs of more than eight
million non-student rural youth enrolled through village-based Youth Clubs.  These Youth Clubs work in the areas
covering education and training, awareness generation, skill development and self-employment, entrepreneurial
development, thrift and co-operation, besides development of the body through sports & adventure and of mind through
sustained exposure to new ideas and development strategies.
           
The continuous growth in the number of grass-root level organisations namely Youth Clubs affiliated with
NYKS show that more and more grass root people are getting associated with  NYKS and thereby beneffiting
themselves from its programmes and activities as shown below :-
 
S.No. Year No. of Youth Clubs affiliated with NYKS
1. 1999-2000 197642
2. 2000-2001 201901
3. 2001-2002 212974
 
With a view to providing greater visibility to its various programmes, the NYKS has been effectively
collaborating with the field publicity units of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.  It has also been bringing
out a bilingual Newsletter highlighting its programmes and activities for greater dissemination of information among the
youth as well as the community.  Nevertheless, the observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
 
9 NATIONAL INTEGRATION PROGRAMME
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
9.3   The Committee feels that programmes of interest to the youth be devised with a view to promoting community
living and sharing of common experiences.
 
Action Taken
 
The objective of the National Integration Scheme is to provide the youth from different parts of the country and
from diverse religious and cultural backgrounds a common platform to interact with each other, know each other’s
customs and life styles, to work together in community welfare projects and, in the process make them aware of the
underlying unity amidst diversity.  By living together in the national integration camps albeit for a limited period, the
youth develop better understanding of different perceptions, beliefs, faiths and life styles.  During inter-state youth
exchange programmes, youth visit different States with marked cultural differences.  During their visit, they familiarize
themselves with the environment, family life, social customs, understand historical and cultural heritage of the country,

147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
problems being faced by the people of different religions and also inculcate a feeling of communal harmony. 
 
 
 
19.            GRANTS FOR CREATION OF SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
            The Committee reiterates the need for creation of adequate infrastructure and that too of an international
standard.  This should be thrown open to all and sundry individuals as well as groups on moderate charges.  This would
facilitate the encouragement for sports.
 
Action Taken
 
 ‘Sports’ is a State subject and it is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments to create various sports
facilities including sports infrastructure of international standards to promote sports at all levels. However, in order to
supplement the efforts of the State Governments in this direction, Central assistance is provided to State Governments 
and others  for creation of sports infrastructure under the above scheme , in  accordance with the approved pattern. The
projects of Indoor Stadium  category-I and Swimming Pool  category-I under the above scheme are of International
Standards  and it is for the State Governments and others to submit viable proposals for grant of admissible Central
assistance. As regards making available the sports projects to individuals / groups on moderate charges , this condition is
already included in the prescribed proforma and   the concerned State Governments/grantees have to give an
undertaking  that “the facilities of the projects will be made available for bonafide  purposes to the general public free of
cost or on nominal/token payment only”. 
    
2.         The response to this scheme was quite encouraging during 2002-03, resulting in requirement of additional funds
to meet the demand for release of assistance to various approved sports projects. Against the BE of Rs.8.90 crores
(including Rs.1.00 crore for NE States) during 2002-03, 85 projects were assisted with total Central assistance of
Rs.10.58 crores.
 
3.            Keeping in mind the financial crunch of the State Governments,  particularly NE States , and with a view to
lessening  the burden of the States, the Ministry has proposed increase in the sharing pattern alongwith  ceiling of
financial assistance for various sports projects, in the revised Scheme,  which is being posed to the EFC and will  be
implemented after obtaining its approval. With the liberalization/introduction of new components in the revised scheme
which includes extension of financial assistance to projects involving construction of artificial surfaces for a number of
sports other than athletics and hockey, and a provision regarding meeting the cost of repairs, etc., it is expected that more
sports infrastructure, including those of international standard, will come up all over India.
 
 
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
2            BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
 
While the role and contribution of youth is of vital importance in all countries, it is particularly significant in a
country like India where the proportion of the youth in the country's overall social and demographic profile is
continuously increasing. According to the 2001 Census, there were approximately 355 million people in the 15 to 35 age
group, 74 per cent of whom lived in rural areas. The number was expected to rise to approximately 510 million by 2016.
Both Central and State governments need to harness the energies of this large group, providing them with adequate
infrastructure of world standards for excellence in sports at national and international levels.
 
The Committee is constrained to observe that no organized effort appears to be forthcoming over a national scale

147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
to tap the potential of the Youth. Youth are the foundation for the development of the country and unless emphasis is
laid on youth programme and put the youth on the right track and right direction, the ultimate goal of nation building can
not be achieved. The Committee feels that in order to develop the youth, a yoga programme should be started throughout
the country for different age groups with a definite capsule of different sets of exercises provided for different age
groups. It should be as near to the homes of the people as possible. Adequate number of volunteers should be trained for
the purpose who may conduct the exercises in Yoga suited to different age groups.  These exercises may be conducted in
an hour say between 5 to 6 a.m. throughout the country. It should be designated a national hour. The trained volunteers
may be paid an allowance for the purpose. This would infuse new energy & fitness among the people and help build a
strong nation. Further modalities, if any, could be worked out services of any existing organization could also be utilized
for the purpose.
 
Action Taken
 
The Committee’s observation regarding youth being the foundation of national development is acknowledged. 
Subject to constraints of funds, it has been the endeavour of the Ministry to mobilise and expand the youth network in
the country and to provide for them an outlet for contributing towards the development of the country.  The scheme of
National Reconstruction Corps was one such attempt through which efforts were made to tap the potential of the youth. 
It is hoped that the scheme would be extended in due course to cover all the districts of the country so as to afford an
opportunity to the youth to render service to the community and the country at large.  As regards the suggestion of the
Committee to start a countrywide programme of Yoga, while the Ministry accepts the same as laudable, it has to be
pointed out that under the Government of India Allocation of Business Rules, promotion of yoga is a subject allocated to
the Department of Indian System of Medicine and Homeopathy. However, the recommendation of the Committee is
being forwarded to the nodal department, as well as the Ministry of Human Resource Development for appropriate
action.  Nonetheless, to begin with, the Ministry is also issuing instructions to the Nehru Yuva Kendras and the National
Service units to promote yoga, as far as feasible, in all their programmes.  
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Challenges being faced by the young people are complex and wide-ranging.  Therefore, the programmes and
projects meant for the youth should be integrated, community driven, people-focussed and result oriented  with a
distinct  aim of  improving the quality of their life while also involving them in the development process of the
community. All Youth programmes, the Committee feels, should be aimed at promoting their welfare and development.
 
4. APPROACHES TO THE TENTH FIVE-YEAR PLAN
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee feels that the objectives are laudable. However, unless dedicated and sincere efforts are made to
achieve these objectives they will remain on paper only. These objectives cannot be achieved overnight. Rather, ground
should have been prepared much earlier for attainment of these objectives. To start with, the Committee feels, that a
nationwide Yoga programme should be started under the supervision of trained volunteers in a morning hour say
between 5.00 to 6.00 a.m. as already mentioned in the foregoing paragraphs, in order to harness the energies of youth.
The Committee hopes that efforts would commence in right earnest. This is expected to energise the nation and also help
promote unity.
 
Action Taken
 
Observation of the Committee has been noted.  The position of the Ministry vis-à-vis the Committee’s
recommendation for starting a nationwide Yoga programme has been explained in the preceding para.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee is happy to know thatthe Ministry was issuing appropriate instructions to the NY kendras and the
National Service Units to promote Yoga  amongst youth.  At the same time, the Committee would like the Ministry to

147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
follow up the implementation of these instructions regularly so that it can be taken as seriously and effectively.
 
10.            YOUTH   HOSTELS
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
            The Committee feels it is necessary to give wide publicity to the existence of youth hostels and also indicate
therein the requirement, if any, the youth were expected to fulfil for making use of these youth hostels.
 
 
 
Action Taken
 
In this connection, it may be pointed out that recently during the conference of Youth Hostel Wardens and
Secretaries/Directors (YAs/YHs) of the State Governments in New Delhi, under the Chairmanship of Secretary
(YA&S), the following points emerged during discussion which will help in giving wide publicity to the existence of
youth hostels :-
 
1. Help/cooperation of Dy. Commissioners/District Magistrates should be sought by the Wardens to give publicity,
increase occupancy and make Youth Hostels more attractive to the youth travellers.
 
2. Youth Hostels should be made the hub of youth activities including promotion of local arts and crafts.
 
3. State level youth festival could be organized in the Youth Hostels.
 
4. The Secretaries/Directors(Youth Services) can take up with their counterparts in the State Tourism Department for
incorporating the details of Youth Hostels in the Brochures published by them for inclusion.
 
5. Area specific programmes viz. Water sports and swimming etc. could be encouraged to attract tourists.
 
2.         These points have been included in the minutes of the meeting which have been circulated among others to all
State Secretaries/Directors in-charge of Youth Services.
 
3.         In addition, the web-site of the Ministry is being upgraded to contain information about existing youth hostels at
various places.  A few Youth Hostels have also established their own web-sites.  Others are being encouraged to emulate
their examples.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            Youth hostels have been created mainly for promoting youth travel and also for enabling them to experience the
rich cultural heritage of our country.  The Committee is apprehensive whether mere circulation of minutes would serve
the purpose.   It feels that based on these points, a comprehensive module for publicity should be developed for
implementation.   Putting relevant information on websites would enable youth from other countries as well to make use
of these facilities.
 
11.            YOUTH WELFARE ACTIVITIES
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee is aware that adolescents have special and distinct needs.  The most important issues concerning
this segment of youth i.e. adolescents are : health, nutrition, education, both formal and non formal, vocation, recreation
and sports, child labour, children in difficult situations, alcohol and drug abuse.  The Committee hopes that the Scheme
would be implemented in letter and spirit within a stipulated timeframe keeping in view the requirements related to this
age group.

147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
 
Action Taken
 
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee feels that it would be appropriate if the Department gives a positive and self contained reply to
its recommendation and not which is  evasive and cryptic.  Keeping in view  the diversified and special needs of the
youth, the Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation.
12.            SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAI)
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
 
The Committee observes that SAI is required to be a purely professional entity devoid of bureaucratic control
and solely devoted to its objective of promoting sport so that country finds an honoured place in the comity of nations.
 
To that end, among other things, the Committee observes that it is absolutely necessary that there is not only
adequate infrastructure in the matter of sports and also whatever infrastructure is created it should be of international
standard.  Besides, it is equally necessary to maintain it and providing timely renewals, repairs and replacements which
is generally not forthcoming.
 
Action Taken
 
SAI is a professional organization consisting of Sports Administrators (48 outstanding sportspersons including
Olympians, Arjuna Awardees/Ex. Internationals), Sports Scientists (46), Coaches (1523), Doctors, Physical Education
Experts, Teachers, Engineers(Civil/Elect), Academicians, Grounds men  and other administrative/accounts staff.  There
has been a continuous endeavour on the part of SAI to bring professionalism in its sports promotion activities.  The
implementation of various SAI Schemes is done by adopting systematic and scientific approach towards sports
promotion.  More and more sportspersons and other experts are associated from time to time for implementing
schemes/programmes of SAI which are implemented by it through its Regional Centres in collaboration with the
concerned State Govt./UT Administration.
 
One of the major objectives of the Sports Authority of India is to bring in excellence in sports training with the
allocated funds under the Plan Schemes.  Presently SAI is running 57 SAI Training Centres, 17 Special Area Games
Centres, 8 Centres of Excellence and also training children in 83 schools and 7 Akharas.  A total of about 8000 children
are undergoing training in these training units.  However, the number of children being trained is very small compared to
the population of the country.  More infrastructure needs to be created at Village  Panchayat level in every State and
more funds need to be allocated for creation of infrastructure and training of elite sports persons to bring in Excellence.
 
All the trainees are trained by the professional coaches who have represented the state or nation during their
playing years.  In addition, foreign coaches/experts are invited from abroad to provide coaching to our sports persons. 
During 2002 Commonwealth/Asian Games there were 42 foreign coaches in different disciplines to train the national
team for different disciplines.  This apart sports scientists/experts are  also associated with the preparation of the national
team and progress thereof is reviewed periodically by Govt./Expert Committee(s) and remedial action thereon  taken.
 
In the XVIIth Commonwealth Games held at Manchester (England) in 2002, India secured fourth position in the
overall medal tally by winning 69 medals consisting of 30 Gold, 22 Silver and 17 Bronze.  This was for the first time in
the history of Indian sports that such a large number of medals were ever won by Indian Team in any mega international
event.
 
In the Busan Asian Games 2002, India secured seventh position in the medal tally by winning 36 medals
comprising 11 Gold, 12 Silver and 13 Bronze.

147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
 
The stadia which were constructed/renovated for the IXth Asian Games held in 1982 are being maintained and
utilized by SAI on behalf of the Government. These stadia are of international standard and were renovated/upgraded in
2001.  However, none of the stadia is financially self-sustaining and their day to day maintenance cost is quite huge even
as per CPWD norms.  Hence, these stadia could not be maintained as envisaged.  Efforts are being made to generate
more income from the Stadia and to increase the budgetary support for their maintenance.  
 
The National Camps for preparing teams in different disciplines on behalf of Government in collaboration with
concerned sports federations  are held at SAI Regional Centres/Academic Wing located at NSNIS, Patiala where
requisite sports infrastructure/sports science set up of international standard is available.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee appreciates the trend of increasing the number of medals in international sports including the
recently held Afro-Asian games in Hyderabd.   But it feels that it is not enough and India has a long and arduous way to
go in this area.   Our infrastructure and outreach is highly inadequate which need to be improved/increased manifold.
 
14.            RURAL SPORTS PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee recommends that Sports activities need to be encouraged keeping in mind the facilities available,
particularly in rural areas and the need to keep in youth fit and keep them engaged in sports activities.  As far as
possible, disciplines which did not require much equipment such as Kho-Kho, Kabaddi, volleyball, track events and long
jump in athletics should be encouraged.  Efforts should also be made to enlist the cooperation of the Ministry of Rural
Development in the promotion of sports in rural areas.  The Ministry should extend assistance to the panchayats for the
creation and maintenance of play fields and for providing sports equipment.
 
Action Taken
Under the scheme of Rural Sports Programme, rural sports tournaments are organized in selected sports
disciplines viz. Athletics, Tug-of-war, Archery, Hockey, Kho-Kho, Kabaddi, Weightlifting, Volleyball, Wrestling,
Football (Boys only), at Block, District, State and National levels. Besides, the State Government may organize
tournaments in any other indigenous sports, popular in the area. While National level tournaments are organized by the
Sports Authority of India (SAI), the other level tournaments, i.e. Block, District and State/UT level tournaments are
organized by the State/UT Governments. These tournaments are organized where the facilities are available.
2.         As regards involvement of the Ministry of Rural Development in promotion of sports in rural areas, this Ministry
has already written to the Ministry of Rural Development in this regard. 
3.         As regards involvement of Panchayat Raj institutions, in the New National Sports Policy which has been
announced in 2001, emphasis has been given to the involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions, Local Bodies,
Educational Institutions, Sports Federations/ Associations, Clubs and Industrial Undertakings in the creation, utilization
and proper maintenance of the sports infrastructure. Accordingly, action will be taken by the Ministry to extend
assistance to the Panchayati Raj Institutions.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Around three-fourth of the youth live in rural areas. While it is the responsibility of the Ministry to harness and
develop the full potential of the youth as partners in nation-building, majority of them still remain unaware of these
sports activities.   Involving PRIs in holding/organising rural sports as well as in maintaining infrastructure may provide
adequate boost to sports in these areas.  The Committee reiterates that organized efforts need to be made at the national
level for this purpose.
 
18.            INCENTIVES FOR PROMOTION OF SPORTS ACTIVITIES/EVENTS
 
Recommendation/Observation
 

147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
The Committee was given to understand that National Welfare Fund for Sportspersons was meant to provide
assistance to sportspersons living in indigent circumstances.  However, it remained a fact that some of our former
sportspersons lived in abject poverty and were sometimes forced to do odd jobs, in order to eke a living.  Except in cases
of a few popular sports, which attracted private sponsorship, the sports activities remained devoid of any career
opportunities for sportspersons.  The Committee feels that there is a need to have definite incentives for sportspersons in
the form of job opportunities.
 
Action Taken
 
There already exists 5% job reservation for meritorious Sportspersons in various Government Ministries/
Departments/ Establishments. As per existing orders of the Department of Personnel and Training, 5% vacancies are to
be filled up by meritorious Sportspersons in Group “C” and Group “D” posts in various Ministries/ Departments/
Establishments of the Government relaxing the recruitment rules.
 
            Besides the above, under the scheme of National Welfare Fund for Sportspersons implemented by the Ministry
of Youth Affairs & Sports, outstanding sportspersons living in indigent circumstances, are given pension upto Rs.2,500/-
per month.  Moreover, a lump-sum financial assistance upto Rs.40,000/- for medical treatment may also be given under
the scheme. 
Comments of the Committee
 
Committee is aware that special awards to winners in international sports events and their coaches are given to
encourage them. The Committee has been given to understand that only a few popular sports are being considered under
this scheme. The Committee recommends that sports which are not so popular should also attract the attention of the
authorities responsible for selecting the awardees.
 
The Committee does not know if the Departments and Ministries were implementing the 5% reservation of posts
in Group C and D categories.  Whether there was any feedback received by the Department from other Ministries in the
past?  The Committee would like to have Ministry-wise statistics in this regard.
 
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 
 
13.            GRANT TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS   
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee is aware of inadequate sports infrastructure at the grass root level throughout the country.  All
Schools do not have playgrounds.  There is dearth of facilities in urban, rural and tribal areas.  The Committee therefore,
recommends that all out efforts are required to be made for providing adequate sports infrastructure through out the
country in a planned manner.
 
            The Committee observes that the entire structure be it the creation of infrastructure, role of sports federations in
the promotion of sports, selection of sportspersons for national as well as international events smacks of favouritism and
not free from corruption.  Even the role of sports federations does not seem to be objective.  The Committee has been
given to understand that there are cases where sports federations are in existence for name sake and for receiving grants. 
They are not concerned with the promotion of sports.  The Committee would like to go into their working later.
 
Action Taken
 
The Committee intends to go into the working of the Federations later.  As such, as and when Committee desires
to do the same, the Federations will be asked to provide required support.

147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
           
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
2            BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Challenges being faced by the young people are complex and wide-ranging.  Therefore, the programmes and
projects meant for the youth should be integrated, community driven, people-focussed and result oriented  with a
distinct  aim of  improving the quality of their life while also involving them in the development process of the
community. All Youth programmes, the Committee feels, should be aimed at promoting their welfare and development.
 
4.         APPROACHES TO THE TENTH FIVE-YEAR PLAN
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee is happy to know thatthe Ministry was issuing appropriate instructions to the NY kendras and the
National Service Units to promote Yoga  amongst youth.  At the same time, the Committee would like the Ministry to
follow up the implementation of these instructions regularly so that it can be taken as seriously and effectively.
 
10.            YOUTH   HOSTELS
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            Youth hostels have been created mainly for promoting youth travel and also for enabling them to experience the
rich cultural heritage of our country.  The Committee is apprehensive whether mere circulation of minutes would serve
the purpose.   It feels that based on these points, a comprehensive module for publicity should be developed for
implementation.   Putting relevant information on websites would enable youth from other countries as well to make use
of these facilities.
 
11.            YOUTH WELFARE ACTIVITIES
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee feels that it would be appropriate if the Department gives a positive and self contained reply to
its recommendation and not which is  evasive and cryptic.  Keeping in view  the diversified and special needs of the
youth, the Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation.
 
12.            SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAI)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee appreciates the trend of increasing the number of medals in international sports including the
recently held Afro-Asian games in Hyderabd.   But it feels that it is not enough and India has a long and arduous way to
go in this area.   Our infrastructure and outreach is highly inadequate which need to be improved/increased manifold.
 
14.            RURAL SPORTS PROGRAMME
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Around three-fourth of the youth live in rural areas. While it is the responsibility of the Ministry to harness and
develop the full potential of the youth as partners in nation-building, majority of them still remain unaware of these
sports activities.   Involving PRIs in holding/organising rural sports as well as in maintaining infrastructure may provide
adequate boost to sports in these areas.  The Committee reiterates that organized efforts need to be made at the national

147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
level for this purpose.
 
18.            INCENTIVES FOR PROMOTION OF SPORTS ACTIVITIES/EVENTS
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Committee is aware that special awards to winners in international sports events and their coaches are given to
encourage them. The Committee has been given to understand that only a few popular sports are being considered under
this scheme. The Committee recommends that sports which are not so popular should also attract the attention of the
authorities responsible for selecting the awardees.
 
The Committee does not know if the Departments and Ministries were implementing the 5% reservation of posts
in Group C and D categories.  Whether there was any feedback received by the Department from other Ministries in the
past?  The Committee would like to have Ministry-wise statistics in this regard.
 
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
XXIII
TWENTY-THIRD MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.30 p.m. on Tuesday, the 9
th December, 2003 in Committee Room No. 63 First Floor,
Parliament House , New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shri Arjun Singh                Chairman
 
      RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Smt. Vanga Geetha
3. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
4. Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik
5. Shri Lalhmingliana
6. Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey
7. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
8. Shri Dara Singh 
 
      LOK SABHA
 
9. Shri Kanti Lal Bhuria
10. Shri Ram Rati Bind
11. Shri R.L. Jalappa
12. Shri A. F. Golam Osmani
13. Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
14. Shri Ramsheth Thakur
15. Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer

147th report of Committee on HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/147threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
               
2.           The Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee, specially the new member Shri Dara Singh, MP,
Rajya Sabha who attended the meeting for the first time.
 
3.         The Committee then took up for consideration  the Action Taken Reports (142
nd to 147 th ) on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Reports of the Committee on Demand-for-grants(2003-04) relating to
the Departments of Family Welfare; Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy; Elementary Education and
Literacy; Secondary and Higher Education; Women and Child Development; and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports.
The Committee adopted these reports and decided to present them reports to the Houses of Parliament on the12
th
December, 2003.
 
4.          Thereafter, some members raised the issue of taking the ISM&H for a special study. The Committee was
informed that a Background Note on the subject had been received from the Department. It was decided that the same
could be circulated to the members before a meeting with the officials of the Department of the ISM&H could be held at
an appropriate time.
 
5.         The Chairman informed the Committee that Action Taken Report of the Department of Health could not be
prepared as the Department had not sent action taken notes so far, despite several reminders, written and verbal.  He also
informed that many other references made by the Committee were pending with the Department for the past several
months. They do not even acknowledge our letters, not to speak of sending replies.  The Committee viewed it seriously
and decided to summon Secretary, Department of Health to ascertain reasons for not being able to send
information/papers to the Committee.      
 
6.         The Committee also decided to visit Bangalore to hear the representatives of some banks / financial institutions
tentatively from 13
th to 15th  January, 2004 on the subject of Gender Budget Analysis – Micro Credit to Women Self
Help Groups.  The Committee authorised the Chairman of the Committee for seeking permission of the Chairman Rajya
Sabha for the said visit.
 
7.         The Committee, then, adjourned at 4.30 p.m.
 
 