CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. Composition of the Commi.ttee iii-iv 
2. Introduction v 
I. Overview 1-2 
II. Methods/Schemes under Family Welfare Programme 3-5 
HI. Rural Health Services 6 
IV. Role of Information and Education 7-8 · 
v. Role of Voluntary Organisations 9 
VI. External Assistance 10 
VII. Performanc~ 11-12 
VIII. Incentives a'nd Disincentives 13 
3. Minutes 17-23 

C0\ ·1POSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLlAiviENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN 
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
(1993-94) 
1. Shri Ram Narcsh Yadav -- Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJY A SABIIA 
2. Prof. Saurin Bhattacharya 
3. Shrimati Renuka Chowdh ury 
4. Dr. Jinendra Kumar Jain 
5. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
6. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
7. Shri T. Chanclrasekh;n Reddy 
8. Shri Md. Salim 
9. Shri Pravat KtuiLJr Samanta ray 
10. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen 
12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shast ri 
13. Shri P. Upendr a 
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
15. Dr. Yishwanathan Kanithi 
16. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran 
17. Prof . (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan ' 
18. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
19. Dr. Vasanl Niwrutti Pawar 
20. Prof. P .J. Kuri en 
21. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak 
22. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
23. Shri Z.M. Kahandolc 
24. Shri Datta Megh e 1 
25.· Shri lshwarbh ai Khodabhai Chavda 
26. Shri K. Thulasiah Vandayar 
27. Shri Aslam Sher Khan 
28. Shri Inder Jit 
29. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
30. Shri Chinmayanand Swami 
(iii) 

31. Shri D~u Dayal Joshi 
32. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda 
33. Dr. K.D. Jeswani 
34. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
35. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
, •36. Vacan~ 
37. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
38. Shri Rambadan · 
39. Shrimati Malini Bhattacharya 
40. Slui Ram Chandra Dome 
41. Shri Brahmanand Mandai 
42. Prof. Ummareddy Venkateswarlu 
43. Shri Suraj Mandai 
44. Shri Kanshi Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Smt. Vanaja N. Sarna, Director 
Shri Om Prakash, Under Secretary 
Shri A.K. Singh, Committee Officer 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer 
•shri Chandrajit Yadav resigned from the membership of the Committee w.c.f. 13th April, 1993. 

INTRODUCT ION 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Re lated Parliament;iry Standing Committe e on 
Human· Resource Deve lopment having been authorised by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Second Report o f the Committc:e on the 
Work ing of the Department of Family Welfare in the Ministry o f Health and . Family 
Welfare. 
2. The Committee considered the. various documents and papers rece ived from the 
Department of Family Welfare, M inistry o f Health and Family Welfare at its sitt ings spread 
over four meetings, and also heard the Secretary (Fam ily Welfare) and other officials of the 
Department on the 9th June, 1993. 
3. The Committee had extensive discussions on the working of the Department of Family 
Welfare and sought clarifications from the representatives of the Department regarding the 
working of the Family Welfare Department, role and responsibil ities of Voluntary · 
Organisations as well as Central and State Governments in implementing the family welfare 
programmes .. 
4. The Committee Jiscussed in u.:pth the method s of Falllily Planning, th e ir popularity 
and propaganda made therefore. The Comm ittee had deliberation on the present scenario of 
the programmes and effects of liten.t cy thereon. 
5. The Committee also extensively discussed rural health, immunisation, incentives and 
disincentives, external assistance etc. fo r fam ily welfa re programmes. 
6. The Commit: c.: l"(lllSide red a nd Jdo pted the Report at its sitting held on the l 9t h 
August, 1993. 
NEW·DELHI 
25th August, 1993 
RAM NARESH Y ADAV 
CHAIRMAN, 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
(v) 

OVERVIEW 
The National Family Welfare~·Programme was launched in India in 1951, with the 
objective of reducing the birth rate so as to stabilise the population at the level consistent 
with the Nation's !!COnomic growth and development. In spite of this, the alarming growth in 
population is one of the most pressing problems faced by the country, today . . India's 
population, which was 342 million in 1947, has touched 846.3 million according to 1991 
census and has crossed the 880 million mark by the end of 1992. 
India, presently; has about 16 per cent of the world's total population and 2.4 per cent of 
the global land area. The rapid increase in population has serious implications for the overall 
socio-economic development of the Country. Success on -the population front is vital for the 
succe ss of all developmental efforts. . 
The Family Welfare Programme in India is being promoted on voluntary basis. The 
programme seeks to promote responsible parenthood, through independent choice of the 
family planning Method best suited to the acceptor. For conveying the message of small 
family norm to the masses, motivational, educational and persuasive efforts are made 
without any resort to any form of coercion. 
The Family Welfare Programme is being implemented as a centrally . sponsored scheme 
under which cent per cent Central Assistance is provided to the States. Health is a State 
subje ct, but in the case of Family Welfare Programme, the Central Government is providing 
specific guidelines for the successful implementation of the programme. 
The financial outlays/expenditure under the programme have been increasing over the 
successive Five Year Plans/ Annual Plans which can be seen in the table given below 
Period Outlay Expenditure 
(in crores of rupees) 
---------- - -------------- -------- -------- ------ ---------------- -----First Plan 1951-56 
Second Plan 1956-61 
Third Plan 1961-66 
Annual Plan (inter-Plan Period) 
1966-67 
1967-68 
1968-69 
Fourth Plan 1969-74 
Fifth Plan 1974-79 
Sixth Plan 1978-83 
1978-79 
1979-80 
Sixth Plan 1980-85 
Seventh Plan 1985-90 
Annual Plan 
1990-91 
1991-92 
Eighth Plan 1992-97 
•Budget provision. 
65.0 (in lakhs) 
5.0 
27.0 
14.9} 31.0 
37.0 
285.8. 
285.6· 
111.8] 116.2 228.0* 
1309.0. 
2868.o• 
675.oo1 1424 o• 749.00j . 
6500.0 
14.5 (in lakhs) 
2.2 
24.9 
13.4] 26.5 70.4 
30.5. 
284.4 
409.0 
107·6] 226 1 118.5 " . 
1429.29 
3105.20 
849.89. ~ 1873 7 
1023.28j ·1 

With a. view to culllain the growth of population, the National Health Policy was also 
enunciated in 1983. This policy aimed .at achieving the Net Reproduction Rate of Unity 
(NRR-1) by the turn of the Century with the crude birth rate of 21 per thousand population, . 
crude .death rate of 9 per thousand population and natural growth rate of 1.2 per cent. Tlte 
Seventh Five Year Plan document envisaged the attainment of this goal irr the period of , 
2006-2011 A.D. It has now been shifted to the period of 2011-2016 A.D. in the Eighth Plan I 
Document. According to the 1991 census, the rate of growth at present is 2.14 per cent. To 
attain the growth rate of 1.2 per c.ent even by 2016 A.D. is not an easy task and needs 'I 
better implementation of the Family Welfare Programme. I 
' 

II 
' METHODS/SCHEMES UNDER THE FAMILY WELFARE PROGRAMME 
TI1e success wheel of family planning programme entirely revolves around the kind of 
methods adopted and the popularity the;;reof. In our country, the procurement and 
distribution of contraceptives is done by the Department of Family Welfare. Under this set 
up, various methods/sei'Vices such as Cu.T., IUD, Oral Contraceptives, etc., are made 
available throughout the country. Amongst the conventional contraceptives, condoms are 
being supplied under free distribution system, through Primary Health Centres, Rural 
Family Welfare Centres and Sub-Centres in rural areas and through hospitals, dispensaries, 
Maternal and Child Health (MCH) Centres and Post Pactum Centres in urban areas. Then 
there is the Social Marketing Scheme providing for sale o( Nirodh at very subsidised rates 
through outlets of various companies. Oral pills were introduced in 1987, facilitating private. 
companies to produce and market the pills. 
Latest techniques include laproseopic sterilisation which calls for supply of United Nations 
Population fund (UNFP A) sponsored laproscopic and Tubal Rings to States/Union 
Territories. For this purpose 20 Central Laproscopic Training Centres have been set up in 
the country to train doctors, nurses and operation theatre technicians. 
During the course of evidence, the Secretary, Department of Family Welfare, informed 
the Committee that sterilisation has become women's programme and as a result 96% of 
sterilisation is performed on women through tubectomy and only 3.5% by vasectomy. 
The Committee feels that this reflected an illconceived bias in the programme and that 
most of the contraceptive methods being popularized are to be used on women and asserted 
that a change in the attitude of planners must be accomplished, so that equal emphasis is 
given on availability of safe methods, both for men and women. 
According to the Secretary, there is relationship between sterilisation and literacy. The 
Secretary confirmed the incidents of death in some cases due to sterilisation but maintained 
that the number of such deaths was declining and a surveillance system was in full swing to 
ensure adequate safety and precautions. 
The Committee regrets the abject mishandling of operation equipment by unqualified 
staff, both in urban as well as in' rural areas. The Committee stresses the need to develop 
infrastructure by starting crash training programmes for all concerned Government or non­
Government persons or bodies to ensure that these methods are administered by properly 
qualified persons only. In addition, the Committee recommends that Government should 
urgently work out a Compensation/Insurance Scheme in cases of deaths due to sterilisation. 
The Committee points out that Government have failed to check the over reporting of the 
sterilisation cases performed by various bodies who haVe been presenting concocted and 
distorted figures. · 
The Committee expresses its deep concern over the abhorrent practice of pre-natal 
diagnostic techniques for determination of the sex of foetus leading to female foeticide 
particularly in urban areas. The Committee feels that such practice has severely affected the 
family welfare programme and is likely to create further imbalance in the male and female 
population ratio. The Committee notes that the Government has already introduced a·draft 
Bill entitled Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and Prevention of Misuse) Bill, 
1991 in Lok Sabha and recommends that there should be no delay in passing an effective law 
on this after full discussion. 

The Conutlittee is not Satisfied with the steps taken by Government in so far as the safety 
and testing of contraceptives is concerned. Side effects due to administration of such 
untested contraceptives lead to various ailments and health hazards and jeopardise the 
popularity of the methods. 
The Committee feels that not much research work has been done on development of new 
contraceptives in fndia and the methods introduced by international bodies/companies have 
not proved quite popular. The feedback on the existing contraceptives is also dubious due to 
lack of proper monitoring. 
•· The Committee urges the Government to ensure transparency through proper monitoring 
of quality control and to stop the use of insufficiently tested contraceptives and abortion 
pills. The Committee stresses the need to conduct extensive research in order to upgrade 
condom, safe period techniques, barrier methods and such non interference contraceptive . 
methods, and also to popularise them. 
The Committee recommends that research in the Ayurvedic system of medicine should be 
expanded and strengthened so that indigenously available ingredients may be u~d and 
ancient science revived, for development of alternative contraceptive · methods. 
IMMUNISATION 
The high Infant Mortality rate proved to be a major impediment in the success of the 
Family Planning Programmes in the country. The uncertainty of a child's survival 
necessitated birth of more children in a family. Existence of such tendency among the 
masses called for an effective programme to tackle . this problem. It was in this background 
that the Immunisation Programme was st~rted in the year 1978. This p~ogramme gained 
momentum in 1985 under the Universal I~:Jllunisation Programme (UIP) with the availabil­
ity of additional inputs in all districts in a· phased manner. There are two other centrally 
sponsored schemes which are being implemented to reduce the Infant Mortality Rate-(i) 
OraVRehydration Therapy Programme; and (ii) Prophylaxis Schemes. The rate of ~nfant 
mortality was as high as 110 in 1981. In the last ten years it has come down to 80. 1l1e 
National Health Policy (1983) envisages reduction in the mortality ra~e to below 60 per 
thousand live births by the turn of the century. 
In order to further reduce the infant and maternal mortality rates, UIP PLUS Programme 
named as Child Survival and Safe Motherhood Project was launched during the year 1992-
93; 1l1e project will~ be made operational in· a phased ·· manner. ··"The project is bein~ 
4
· ­
implemented with financial assistance from the World Bank aqd the UNICEF. -, . 
The Committee views the present high rate of infant mortality as a major obstacle to the 
acceptability of small family norms. The Committee feel~ that effective steps should be taken· 
to bring down the infant mortality rate so that people may accept family planning more 
' readily. 
The Committee is not satisfied regarding the full utilisation of the money that is spent on 
the UIP and feels tha~ without participation of · the people at grass root level and 
involvement of institutions like the Pan~hayat, this programme may be lagging behind in 
disadvantaged and backward areas where this is mos~ needed. The discrepancy between the 
performance in one area or one State and another is particularly noted and it is suggested 
that -a more effective monitoring system is required to make up for such discrepancy. 
While welcoming family welfare projects like Child Survival and Safe Mptherhood 
projects, the Committee notes that these are yet to be extended to reach a majority of those 
in dire need of the benefit of these schemes. The relationship of these schemes with the 
Family Planning programme is also yet to be properly explained to the poor urban and rural 
women, who need the advice. · 

TI1e Committee recommends that there has to be a random check on the potency of the 
vaccines and that there has to be better coordination between the Centre and the States for 
the maintenance of the cold chain, so as to retain the potency of the vaccines. 
The Committee also recommends that proper arrangements should be made to ensure 
regular and adequate supply of vaccines . . 

UI 
RURAL HEALTH SERVl~ES 
At present, the rural health infrastructure consists of 20,847 primary health centres (PHC) 
and 1,30,782 sub-centres. The PHC earlier catered to a population of one lakh, now it 
.provides a coverage to every 30,000 rural people, which is further relaxed to 20,000 in tribal 
and other difficult areas. Community Health Centres, with 30 bed rural hospitals and four 
specialists and investigation facilities have also been set up upgrading the PHCs to cover a 
population of 80,000 to 1 ,20,000. · ... 
/ SuB~tENTRES 
Till the end of 7th plan, 1,29,291 sub-ceQtres were functioning and their number rose to 
1 1,30,782 by the end of September, 1992 against the estimated requirement of 1,38 lakh Sub­
centres for the Seventh Plan. Due to non-availability of funds for opening new Sub-centres, 
the targets were not alJQtted to the States/Union territories during the years 1990-91, 1991-
92 and 1992-93. ' 
The Committee notes with concern that while the numerical target in opening Sub-centres 
during 7th Five Year Plan has not been reached, many of those which have been opened are 
suffering from lack of proper maintenance. It also needs proper monitoring as to whether 
sufficient Sub-centres . are being opened in the most needy localities and whether proper 
facilities are being provid ed there. 
The Committee observes that no reasons have been assigned in the Annual Report 1992-
93 for not providing the funds for opening new Sub-centres since 1990, while the World 
B;mk is also assisting in implementation of the Family Welfare Programme. The Comminee, 
therefore, recommends that all the Sub-centres. should be made functional immediately and 
the funds should be provided for opening new Sub-centres . 
TRAINING OF DAIS 
The deliveries in the rural areas are conducted by Dais and they are also involved in the 
propagation of small family norm. 
The Committee is surprised to note that 1.18 lakh untrained Dais are working in the rural 
areas and so far they have not been trained in the profession. The Committee, therefore 
recommends that these Dais should be trained immediately for the improvement of the 
Family Welfare Programme. 
VILLAGE HEALTH GUIDE SCHEME 
The VilJage Health Guide Scheme was started in 1981. To evaluate the working of the 
scheme in various States and Union Territories and to suggest steps required for 
improvement of the scheme, a Task Force was set up in the Ministry in 1989 and its report is 
still under consideration. 
The Committee is constrained to observe that so far the recommendations of the Task 
Force have not been considered and impleme'nted by the Government. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that a quick decision should be~ taken about implementation of the 
recommendations of the Task Force. The Village Health Guide Scheme should also be 
strengthened so as to achieve the desired objectives. 
'#. 

IV 
ROLE OF INFORMATION AND EDUCATION IN THE 
FAMILY WELFARE PROGRAMMES 
In a vast country like India, where a large number of population is illiterate and poor, it is 
very necessary to create awareness among people about family planning programme. For 
ma~ing it a people's programme in terms of its acceptability 'i.e., popularity, the significance 
of propaganda through information, education and communication is unquestioned. 
The Commiuee has been given to understand that the Government has started a campaign 
through com~n mode of communications like Doordarshan and All . India Radio, in 
addition to printing of posters and advertisements on the merits of family planning. The 
advantages of small family are highlighted through films, plays and spots on Doordarshan 
and AIR and through advertisements for which exclusive responsibility has been entrusted to 
Directorate of Advertisement and Visual Publicity. The Department of Family Welfare is 
giving Rs. 6.5 crores to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for exclusive publicity 
on Family Planning matters. 
According to the Government report, in remote and rural areas video vans are sent in 
addition to supply of publicity material or films in the form of audio visuals for making 
people aware of the need for family planning. For this Government have identified 90 poorly 
performing districts in the country. Apart from this Anganwadi Workers, village school 
teachers and educated people in ine rural areas have been involved for spreading the 
message by persuading masses towards small family norms. Active assistance from Mahila 
Swasthya Sangh is also being obtained in the matter. 
/ The Committee views that publicity is an effective way of creating awareness amongst the 
people and feels that proper monitoring and feedback must be provided to publicise various 
family planning schemes. 
As regards publicity campaigns in rural areas the Committee observes that the popularity 
of contraceptives remains confined to the urban and industrial pockets and in rural areas the 
programme is not making any substantial impact due to poor publicity. The Committee 
suggests that the health guides and literate women should be involved at village level for 
convincing rural women about the utility of family planning methods. Voluntary and Non-
Government organisations should be encouraged to undertake the task of publicity. · 
The Committee feels that the present budget provision for publicity of Family Planning 
Programme is not being utilised effectively. In the view of the Committee, it would be better 
if the publicity expenditure is handled by the Department of Family Welfare itself, instead of 
transferring the same to the Information and Broadcasting Ministry and also recommends 
that each Ministry I Department must mobilise its own resources separately by making a 
budget provision for implementation of family planning and Government should accept 
collective responsibility to ensure that burden does not fall on a single Department. 
While inedia publicity is important, if Family Planning is to be made a people's 
programme, it is also important that local grass root institutions like clubs, libraries and 
panchayats should be involved in dissemination of the need for family planning and its 
connection with family welfare. Village and folk art-forms must be used in rural areas. These 
) 
do not require any substantial financial investment, but may be very effective in making the 
people in villages participate in family planning programmes . 
...., 

The Committee observes that the best incentives for family planning are (a) better chances 
f child survival as a result of family welfare services, (b) chances of improvement in 
standard of living and (c) growth of educational facilities. The Committee notes that family 
welfare services and educational facilities have not gone down to the poorest and most 
backward sections of society and this is one of the reasons for sufficient people's initiative 
ot being generated for the Family Planning programme. The Committee recommends co­
rdination among relevant ministries ior this purpose. 
The Committee feels that thorough study should be undertaken of the connections 
tween poverty, illiteracy and fertility rates. The connection between prevalence of child 
~
bour and fertility rates should also be studied. Expansion of family welfare services and 
centives to education, particularly among poverty striken and backward sections is likely to 
scourage child labour and give the people the much needed motivation for Family Planning 
!
rogrammes. Therefore, the Committee recommends the immediate expansion of such 
rogrammes, alongwith proper monitoring so as to ensure that they reach the disadvantaged 
ections both in the urban and rural areas. The Committee expresses its concern over the 
decline of sex ratio from 950 to 927 women per 1000 men. Neglect of the girl-child in 
nutrition and other basic rights has to be remedied at all costs. The lag in education of 
women should also be immediately covered. Laws against child marriage should be made 
more stringent and their proper implementation ensured. 

v 
f ROLE OF VOLUNTARY ORGANISATIONS 
Voluntary Organisations play a vital role in promoting the family Welfare Programmes in 
the country. Their contribution towards making small family norm a people's movement 
needs no emphasis. The complexity and sensitivity of the Family Welfare Programmes, 
which calls for a change in social and personal attitudes, highlights the credibility of 
voluntary workers. 
An amount of Rs. 500 lakhs has been earmarked for the N.G.Os. in the budget estimates 
for the year 1993-94. Financial powers have been delegated to States for approving the 
projects involving N.G.Os. Special schemes have also been evolved for involvement of 
N.G.Os. in the areas which are unserved, under-served or are resistant to acceptance of 
family planning. 
In order to enhance the performance of N.G.Os, Workshops, Seminars and Study tours 
have been organised at State levels. This provides them with an opportunity to interact and 
share experience between the various agencies to monitor the grants. State level SCOV A 
Committees have been set up in some parts of the country to deal with the N.G.O. sector 
schemes and projects. 
With the assistance of United States Agency for International Development, a Private 
Voluntary Organisation for Health (PHOV-II) Scheme has been formulated. The agreement 
envisages provision of fina~cial assistance to the extent of $ 10 million. The voluntary 
organisations are required to contribute 25% of the total cost of project. F0rty such projects 
have been identified for funding and thirty four have been sanctioned. The main objective of 
the project is to reduce morbidity, mortality and fertility among the rural and urban poor. 
The Committee, however, sought further clarifications regarding the USAlD scheme, its 
conditionalities, and the actual manner of involving the NGOs, in the scheme. It was 
emphasized that there must be transparency in the working out of the USAID scheme and, 
on no account, should such schemes become a conduit for experimentations with insuffi­
ciently-tested or possibly hazardous drugs. 
The Committee notes with concern the delay in the sanctioning of funds to N.G.Os in 
some States. The Committee recommends that the flow of funds, equipment and supplies to 
voluntary agencies and organisations should be free and smooth and that the mechanism to 
redress their grievances should be made more accessible to them. 
·The Committee also stresses the need for full and effective monitoring of the work being 
done by NGOs. All schemes involving NGOs must take place under full government 
. supervision. 

VI 
EXTERNAL ASSISTANCE FOR FAMILY WELFARE PROGRAMME 
The internal resource constraint has led the family Welfare Programme in India to go in 
for external assistance. Some projects in the country have been identified and are getting 
.external aid for implementation of the same. The source of such aids are various U.N. 
agencies, Bilateral agreements and International agencies. 
The United Nations Population Fund (UNFP A) has been giving assistance to our country 
since 1974. The major areas where this assistance is . being utilised are for Populatioin 
Education, Area Projects in selected districts., and other such activities. 
Assistance from UNICEF was received during the Seventh Five Year Plan towards the 
Universal Immunisation Programme. During the year 1991-1995, an amount of US$ 107 
million is to be provided by UNICEF for the Child Survival and Safe Motherhood 
Programme. 
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is providing assistance 
to-
(a) Family Planning, Communication and Marketing Project; 
(b) Private Voluntary Organisations for Health (PVOH-II Scheme); and 
.(c) Innovations in Family Planning Services Projects in U.P. 
The other bilateral agencies providing assistance for various projects are Norwegian 
Agency for the International D evelopment (NORAD), The Danish International Develop­
ment Agency (DANIDA), Overseas Development Administration (ODA) of U.K. etc. 
The Committee feels that the progress of the projects being run with the help of extemal 
assistance has not been satisfactory. The Committee recommends that the utilisation of the 
external assistance, received and released to the States for implementation of specific 
projects, should be monitored effectively and a study of its impact on the masses be 
undertaken. 

t 
VII 
PERFORMANCE 
I 
During the course of evidence, the Secretary, Department of Family Welfare, informed 
that the annual exponential growth rate has risen from 1.25% in 1941-51 to 2.14% in 
1981-91. There has, however, been a slight reduction in growth rate in the last decade. The 
Secretary conceded that the progress has not been as rapid as it should have been. Marked 
variations have also been observed in the success of the programme in various States. The 
States like Goa, Kerala and Tamil Nadu, with crude birth rates of 16.8, 18.1 and 20.7 
respectively, are do·ing very well. On the other hand, the crude birth rates in Assam (30.9), 
Bihar (30.5), Haryana (33.1), Madhya Pradesh (35.8), Rajasthan (34.3) and Uttar Pradesh 
(35.1) are higher than the national average of 29.3 per thousand population in 1991. Similar 
variations are seen in respect of the infant mortality rates. At one end of the spectrum, 
Kerala has an infant mort·ality rate of only 17 per thousand live births whereas it is as high 
as 122 ·in Madhya Pradesh, 126 in Orissa and 93 in Uttar Pradesh. The total fertility rates in 
Bihar (5.1), Haryana (4.4), Madhya Pradesh (4.7) Rajasthan (4.7) and Uttar Pradesh (5.2) 
are significantly higher than the all-India average of 3.9. · 
The Committee expresses deep concern over the slow progress of the programme in 
certain States and recomr:nends that the programme must be implemented effectively 
throughout ~e country. The Government should go into the details of failure of 
programmes in some States to identify the reasons and to take corrective measures. 
The Committee feels that more effective and result oriented measures should be adopted 
to implement this programme of national priority. People must be thoroughly informed and 
convinced about the efficacy of the programme. In order to achieve the desired objective, it 
is imperative to make it a people's programme. 
The Committee finds that some States have not fully spent their funds and feels that · they 
should be more vigilant so that the funds are fully spent and recommends that allocation of 
Central funds to the States should be distributed periodically throughout the year and should 
not be at the fag-end of the year. 
The Committee observes that the statistics given by different bodies, Health Workers and 
I 
even Doctors are being manipulated, thus giving a false and distorted picture of the progress 
of the Family Welfare Programme. 
The Committee feels that proper evaluation of the programme at every level, in all the 
States, be made so that cases of over-reporting may be minimised. This will also help in 
· generating interest and faith in the programme among the masses. 
, The Committee further observes that to make the programme a real success there must be 
j proper monitoring an~ random. checks~ by the aut~orities concerned. Political parties should 
1 also play a constructive role m t~e tmplementatiOn of the programme. : 
I. The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that the Nation al Policy on Population, 
which is before. the National Development Council, has still not been finalised. The 
Committee recommends that this Policy should be formulated without any further delay and 
~ that there should be a national consensus among all political parties on this policy. 

The Committee feels that since Health is a State subject, there must be a coordination 
Committee at the: national level to watch and monitor the Family Welfare Programme from 
the Centre. 
In answer to a question, the Secretary, Department of Family Welfare informed the 
Committee that the Government ·did not at this stage, propose to adopt zero growth rate or 
one-child nonn as targets. The Government wo 'uld think of this only after stabilization of the 
growth has been achievea. For adoption of one-child nonn, infant mortality rate has to come 
down further. 

VIII 
INCENTIVES AND DISINCENTIVES 
Incentives, which seek to directly influence fertility behaviour, can play a crucial role in 
the population control strategy. At present, some incentives in the shape of advance 
increments and interest rebate on house building advance etc. are available to the employees 
of the Central Government, Public Sector Undertakings and many State Governments .. 
Incentives are also given by the Central Gove·rnment to the members of gener<il public by 
way of compensation for the loss of wages to the acceptors of sterilisation/!UD insertions. 
Some States have introduced incentives in the form of lottery tickets and scheme of issuing 
Green C:11ds ~.:ntjtling the acceptors of steril isation with two or less children, preferential 
lrl.'.tt;lll'll! iu n.: 11~1in art;as. The St;llt;S likt; Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh,. Maharashtra, 
){;:j., ~.l .. :l l •••~<I ·r .. lltil Natlu have intHhi<IL·cJ schemes of giving long term bon d to the 
acceptor of stcrlisation, having only female children. · 
Th.: C'·ln.u :iik<! !.as bf:cn infornH.: d th at a r ~,· i ~ <·d pac kage of incent ives and rlisinccntivcs 
under tilt; F:.liiily \\'clfa re ProgranJill C i~ bcing formulated and the matter is bdore the 
National Development Council and as soon as the N.D.C. takes a decision on that, action 
·n be taken in regard to incentives and disincentive';;. 
The Committee is surprised to note that so far Government has not formulated any new 
innovative package of incentives and · disincentives and it recommends that the 
vemment should take immediate action in this regard and also make provisions for the 
...... ,,...nee cover to the life of the acceptor of sterilisation under the Family Welfare 

MINUTES 

·MINUTES 
. RELATED 
OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMIITEE ON 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
VI 
*SIXTH MEETING 
2. !'l v l. ::,~sur1n lJllHll;.H .. h<H)'a 
3. Dr. Jinendra Kumar Jain 
4. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
5. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
6. Shri Md. Salim 
7. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
8. Shri· P. Upendra 
9. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
WK SABHA 
10. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
11. Dr. Vasant Niwrutti Pawar 
U. Prof. P .J. Kurien 
13. Shri Datta Meghe 
14. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
15. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
16. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
17. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
18. Dr. G .L. Kanaujia 
19. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
· 20. Shrimati Malini Bhattacharya 
2,. Shri Brahmanand Mandai 
22. Shri Suraj . Mandai 
•Minutes or I to V meetings relate 10 m•«en noc induded in this Report. 
. '· ;\ t' 

Representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Family 
Welfare) 
Smt. Usha Vohra, Secretary 
• Shrimati A.P. Ahluwalia, Financial Advisor and Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Vineeta Rai, Joint Secretary 
Kumari Sujata Rao, Joint Secretary 
Dr. J.P. Gupta, Director, National Institute of Health & Family Welfare, Delhi. 
Dr. Badri Saxena, Dy. Director General, ICMR. 
Dr. K.B. Pathak, Director, Indian Institute of Population Studies, Bombay. 
Shri R.L. Narsiman, Director (Marketing) 
Shri G. Rajmohan, Chairman and Managing Director, HLL, Trivandrum. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Om Parkash, Ut1der Secretary 
Shri A.K. Singh, Committe e Officer 
2. The Committee heard the Secretary, (Family Welfare), Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare regarding Annual Report for the year 1992-93 concerning Department of Family 
Welfare. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 6.15 P.M. to meet again on the lOth June, 1993 at 
11.00 A.M. 

IX 
•NINTH MEETING 
The Ikp<HIIIH:nt Rclat<:d l'arliamcntary St<tnding Com mit lee on I Iuman l(c\OIIICC 
Pl·vc · !c~;·lll•·nt JJil'l at I 1.00 A.f·.f ;111 Wednc-;clay, the 2lrd June, 19<Jl, in Committee Room 
hJ, I 11~1 J·lttll l, l',tlli;ullclll llow.t: .-\tollO.C, i..:cw i klhi. 
l'ltE SENT 
I. Sill i : .. :' sl •"·" Yadav 
l \ ' r • • • • .. • 
'. 
7. Slu i l' 1 ava I ~Uil1al ~;:1 rn :1 rtt :o t .a)' 
8. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
:9. Shri P. Upendra 
LOK SADHA 
10. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran 
11. Dr. Vasant Niwrutti Pawar 
12. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
13. Shri lshwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
14. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
15. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
16. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
17. Smt. Malini Bhattacharya 
18. Shri Brahmanand Mandai 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
Shri A.K. Singh, Committee Officer 
('/wit tlltlll 
2. The Committee discussed and decided the points to be included in the Second Draft 
Report of the Committee concerning Department of Family Welfare which is likely to be 
laid/presented in the ensuing Session of the Parliament. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.10 P.M. 
•Minutes of VII &. VIII meetings relate to mailers not induded in this Report . 
19 

X 
TENTH MEETING 
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development met at 11.00 A.M. on thursday, the 15th July, 1993, in Committee Room 'A', 
Ground Aoor, ParliC;tment House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shii Ram Naresh Yadav 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Prof. Saurin Bhattacharya 
3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
4. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
5. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
6. Prof. L G. Sanadi 
LOK SABHA 
7. Dr. V. Raje shwaran 
8. Prof. P. J. Kurien 
9. Shri Subhash Chandra Nayak 
10. Shri Ishwarbh ai Khodabhai Chavda 
11. Shri Aslam Sher Khan 
12. Shri Chinmayanand Swami 
13. Slui Dau Dayal Joshi 
14. Dr. K. D. Jeswani 
15. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
16. Dr. G. L. Kanaujia 
17. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
18. Smt. Malini Bhattacharya 
19. Shri Brahmanand Mandai 
20. Prof. Umareddy Venkateswarlu 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri · R. C. Soperna, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
Shri A. K. Singh, Committee Officer 
Chairman 
2. The Committee considered the draft Second Report of the Committee on the working 
of the Department of Family Welfare, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The discussion 
was not concluded. · 
3. The Committee adjourned at 1.55 P.M. to meet again on the 16th July, 1993 at 3.00 
P.M. 

XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 16th July, 1993, in Committee Room 'A', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yadav .' 
RAJY A SABIIA 
2. Prof. Saurin Bhattacharya 
3. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
LOK SABHA 
4. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
5. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
6. Dr. .G.L. Kanaujia 
7. Shri Braja Kishore Triparhy 
8. Smt. Malini Bhatlacharya 
9. Prof. Umareddy Venkateswarlu 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Sopema, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
Shri A.K. Singh, Committee Officer 
Chairman 
2. The Committee further considered the draft Second Report of the Committee on the 
working of the Department of Family Welfare, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and the 
discussion was not cone) uded. 
3. The Committee adjourned at 4.15 P.M. 

XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development met at 9.00 A.M. on , Monday, the 3rd August, 1993, in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Md. Salim 
3. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
4. Shri P. Upendra 
LOK SABHA 
5. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri .Lakshmanan 
6. Dr. Vasant Miwrutti Pawar 
7. Prof. P. J. Kurien 
8. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
9. Dr. G. L. Kanaujia 
10. Shri Rambadan 
11. Smt. Malini Bhattacharya 
12. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
Shri A.K. Singh, Committee Officer 
Chairman 
2. The Committee after some deliberations decided to re-draft the Second Report of the 
Committee concerning Department of Family Welfare, Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 9.40 A.M. 

XIII 
TIDRTEENTH MEETING 
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human · Resource 
Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 19th August, 1993, in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Prof. Saurin Bhattacharya 
3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
;4. Shri Md. Salim 
5. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
6. Prof. I. G. Sanadi 
7. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
8. Shri P. Upendra 
LOK SABHA 
9. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
10. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
11. Shri K. Thulasiah Vandayar 
12. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
13. Shri Braja Kishorc Tripathy 
14. Smt. Malini Bhattach .arya 
15. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
SECRETARIAT 
Smt. Yanaja N. Sarna, Director 
Shri Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
Shri A.K. Singh, Committee Officer 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer 
Chairman 
2 .. The Committee considered draft Second Report and adopted the same with some 
modifications. It decided to present/lay the Report to Both the Houses of Parliament on 
Wednesday, the 25.th August, 1993 and authorised the Chairman and in his absence S/Shri 
Md. Salim and Vishnu Kant Shastri to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and also 
authorised Prof. P.J. Kurien and Smt. Malini Bhattacharya to Jay the Report in the Lok 
Sabha. ' · 
3. The Committee then adjourned at ~.45 P.M. 