PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 240
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON HUMAN  RESOURCE  DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FORTIETH REPORT
ON
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM
SEXUAL OFFENCES BILL, 2011
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2011/AGRAHAYANA, 1933 (SAKA)DECEMBER, 2011/AGRAHAYANA, 1933 (SAKA)
ST
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21  DECEMBER, 2011)ST
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 21  DECEMBER, 2011)
ST
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21  DECEMBER, 2011)ST
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 21  DECEMBER, 2011)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FORTIETH REPORT
ON
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM
SEXUAL OFFENCES BILL, 2011
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21 ST DECEMBER, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 21 ST DECEMBER, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2011/AGRAHAYANA, 1933 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................ (ii i)-(iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—31
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ........................ 32—38
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 39—50
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 51 —75

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HRD
(2010-11)
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri M. Rama Jois
6. Shri Pramod Kureel
7. Shri N.K. Singh
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
10. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Kirti Azad
12. Shri P.K. Biju
13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
14. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
15. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
16. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
17. Shri Rahul Gandhi
18. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
19. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
20. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
21. Shri P. Kumar
22. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
23. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
24. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
25. Shri Tapas Paul
26. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
27. Shri Ashok Tanwar
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
30. Shri P. Viswanathan
31. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
(i)
Constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2010.

(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HRD
(2011-12)
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri M. Rama Jois
6. Shri Pramod Kureel
7. Shri N.K. Singh
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
10. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
12. Shri Kuvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
13. Shri Mirza Mehboob Beg
14. Shri Sameer Bhujbal
15. Shri P.K. Biju
16. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
17. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
18. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
19. Shri Rahul Gandhi
20. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
21. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
22. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
23. Kumari Saroj Pandey
24. Shri Prasanna Kumar Patasani
25. Shri Balakrishna Khanderao Shukla
26. Shri Ashok Tanwar
27. Shri Joseph Toppo
28. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
29. Shri P. Viswanathan
30. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
*31. Shri Rathod Ramesh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
Constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011.
*Nominated w.e.f.  25 th November, 2011.

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and
Fortieth Report of the Committee on the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Bill, 2011*.
2. The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Bill, 2011 was introduced in the Rajya
Sabha on 23 March, 2011. In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred** the Bill to the Committee on
28 March, 2011 for examination and report.
3. The Committee started its deliberations by issuing a Press Release on 8 June, 2011 for
inviting views and suggestions of the general public as well as the stakeholders on the Bill. The
Committee received 15 memoranda in response to the Press Release. The memoranda were
forwarded to the Ministry of Women and Child Development for comments. Views of the
stakeholders and the comments of the Ministry were taken note of while formulating the
observations and recommendations of the Committee. The Committee heard the views of the
Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development in its meeting held on 18 August, 2011.
Besides the Ministry, the Committee also held deliberations with a number of stakeholders which
included the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights, Civil Society Organizations and
Child Right Agencies, i.e. HAQ Centre for Child Rights, India Alliance for Child Rights, Tulir Centre
for Prevention & Healing of Child Sexual Abuse, Indian Council for Child Welfare, PRAYAS,
MARG, Don Bosco-National Forum for the Young at Risk, SOS Children’s Village and Save the
Children-a Pro Child Protection Coalition.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in five sittings held on 18 August, 30 September,
13 October, 8 and 19 December, 2011.
5. The Committee, while drafting the Report, relied on the following:-
(i) Background Note on the Bill and Note on the clauses of the Bill received from the
Ministry of Women and Child Development
(ii) Presentation made and clarifications given by the Secretary, Ministry of Women and
Child Development
(iii) Feedback received from the Ministry on the questionnaires and the memoranda of the
stakeholders along with the issues raised by the Members during the course of the
oral evidence; and
(iv) Replies to the questionnaire and feedback received from the stakeholders heard by the
Committee.
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 2 dated 23rd March, 2011.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II No. 48393 dated the 29th March, 2011.

6. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the Bill and adopted the same in its meeting
held on 19 December, 2011.
7. For facility of reference, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been
printed in bold letters at the end of the Report.
OSCAR FERNANDES
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
December 19, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary
Agrahayana 28, 1933  (Saka) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development.
(iv)

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Bill, 2011 was referred to the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development by the Chairman, Rajya
Sabha on 28 March, 2011 for examination and report.
1.2 The proposed Bill seeks to protect children from offences of sexual assault, sexual harassment
and pornography and provide for establishment of Special Courts for trial of such offences and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
1.3 The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill reads as follows:-
“Article 15  of the Constitution, inter alia, confers upon the State powers to make
special provision for children. Further, Article 39 , inter alia, provides that the State shall in
particular direct its policy towards securing that the tender age of children are not abused and
their childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and they are given facilities to
develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity.
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Children, ratified by India on
11
th December, 1992,  requires the State Parties to undertake all appropriate national, bilateral
and multilateral measures to prevent (a) the inducement or coercion of child to engage in any
unlawful sexual activity; (b) the exploitative use of children in prostitution or other unlawful
sexual practices; and (c) the exploitative use of children in pornographic performances and
materials.
The data collected by the National Crime Records Bureau shows that there has been
increase in cases of sexual offences against children. This is corroborated by the ‘Study on
Child Abuse: India 2007’ conducted by the Ministry of Women and Child Development.
Moreover, sexual offences against children are not adequately addressed by the extant laws. A
large number of such offences are neither specifically provided for nor are they adequately
penalized. The interests of the child, both as a victim as well as witness, need to be protected.
It is felt that offences against children need to be defined explicitly and countered through
commensurate penalties as an effective deterrence.
It is therefore, proposed to enact a self contained comprehensive legislation inter alia
to provide for protection of children from the offences of sexual assault, sexual harassment and
pornography with due regard for safeguarding the interest and well being of the child at every
stage of the judicial process, incorporating child-friendly procedures for reporting, recording of
evidence, investigation and trial of offences and provision for establishment of Special Courts
for speedy trial of such offences.
The Bill would contribute to enforcement of the right of all children to safety, security
and protection from sexual abuse and exploitation.”
1.4 The Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development in his deposition before the
Committee on 18 August, 2011 gave an overview of the background necessitating a special legislation
for the protection of children from sexual offences. Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that
the Constitution of India permitted positive discrimination in favour of children and provided that the
State shall direct its policy to ensure its policy to ensure that children are not abused. Article 39 of
the Constitution provided that the State shall direct its policy to secure that the tender age of the child

2
was not abused and that the State would ensure that the children were given opportunities to develop
in conditions of freedom and dignity. He also made a mention of India being a signatory to the UN
Convention on the Rights of Child which placed an obligation on the country to give primary
consideration to the best interest of the child in all actions undertaken by it including the actions
undertaken by the Courts of Law, Administrative Authorities or the Legislative Bodies. Elaborating
further, the Secretary pointed out that Articles 3(2) and 34 of the Convention placed a specific duty
on the State to protect the child from all forms of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse.
1.5 Committee’s attention was drawn to the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) data which
indicated that there had been a significant increase in sexual offences against children which included
rape, procuration of minor girls, buying and selling of girls for prostitution up from 2,265 in 2004
to 5694 in 2009. Further, out of total 20,890 reported cases of rape in 2009, nearly 24 per cent i.e.
5368 rape cases were against children. What was more worrisome was that 11 per cent of such cases
were against children below the age of 14 years and 3 per cent against children below the age of 10
years.
1.6 Co-relating the number of cases with the conviction rate of offences of rape against children,
the Secretary drew the attention of the Committee to the disturbingly revealing figures. It was
informed that the conviction rate of rape cases had come down to 30.7 per cent in 2009 from 38.7
per cent in 2001. In the case of procuring of minor girls, the conviction rate had fallen even further
from 39.1 per cent to 18.9 per cent during the same period. It was submitted that lower conviction
rate was one of the reasons for increasing tendency to commit offences against children. On a
specific query about the specific factors behind such trend, Committee’s attention was drawn to the
following:
– lack of adequate evidence particularly in rape case;
– prolonged investigation process by police;
– lack of effective victim protection programmes combined with protracted judicial
proceedings and stigma faced by victims; and
– poor knowledge about the existing legal provisions for women amongst the police.
1.7 Committee was also apprised about a study on child abuse conducted by the Ministry in 2007
covering 13 States. Out of 12, 447 children interviewed for the study, more than 53 per cent reported
having faced one or more forms of sexual abuse. More importantly, 50 per cent abusers were reported
to be known to the child or were people who were in a position of trust or responsibility with respect
to the child. The Committee observes that 13 S tates covered under the study are Mizoram, Assam,
Goa, Delhi, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra
Pradesh, Gujarat and Kerala. The Committee has been given to understand that the selection of States
was done zone-wise, ensuring that sampling States represented all qualities of offences/crimes against
children. Given the representative nature of the sample and criteria adopted for the selection of 13
States for the study, the findings of the study can be considered reflective of child abuse in the
remaining States also.
1.8 The Committee takes note of the major existing laws that address sexual offences against
children which include the Indian Penal Code, the Immoral (Traffic) Prevention Act, 1956, the Cable
Television Network (Regulation) Act, 1995 and the Information and Technology (Amendment)
Act, 2008. However, these laws do not recognize many offences against children as offences such
as sexual assault, sexual harassment, sexual violence against children etc. Further, there are no
effective laws dealing with sexual abuse of male children. In  such a scenario, with increasing incidents
of sexual offences against children and low conviction rate, one can only conclude that the existing
laws are not adequate enough.

3
1.9 Advocating the need for a special legislation for the protection of children, the Secretary
submitted that since children were more vulnerable and scope for their exploitation and abuse being
far more, given their tender age and innocence, a separate legislation was required to protect the
children from all possible kinds of situation in which they could be used, abused or misused. It was
emphasized that such a law, in addition to providing protection to children would also help in the
development of child jurisprudence in this country. Currently, children’s trials were getting mixed with
adults not only because the Criminal Justice Administration System was more geared to dealing with
the crimes against adults but investigations undertaken by the police were also geared to handling
crimes against adults. The Ministry strongly believed that in such a situation, it was very difficult to
safeguard the interests of the child both as a victim and as a witness. As 20 per cent of the world’s
children were living in India, it was one of the compelling reasons for the Ministry to bring forth a
jurisprudence which was child sensitive and provided for a child-friendly environment in dealing with
crimes against children.
1.10 On a specific query about laws addressing sexual offences against children in other countries,
the Committee was informed that a review of legislations of several countries, with focus on providing
clear definition of an offence, grading of the penalty as per the severity of the offence, provisions
for aggravated situations, commission of offence by persons in position of trust or responsibility and
securing the best interest of the child at every stage of the judicial process was conducted by the
Ministry. A mention of the special law in UK for sexual offences against children, a separate chapter
in the Penal Code of USA for sexual offences against children and special laws addressing different
kinds of offences against children in Ireland and South Africa was made in this context. The
Committee was given to understand that the review had proved useful in the formulation of the
proposed legislation.
1.11 Against this backdrop, it was internally debated in the Ministry whether to amend the IPC and
add a chapter on child sexual offences or to have a special law looking at the international experience.
Amendments to IPC was a long drawn process as it required consultation with the Law Commission,
the State Governments and a lot of stakeholders. Attention was drawn to the proposal for amendment
to section 376 of IPC which had continued to be under consideration for the last ten years.
Accordingly, a consensus was evolved to bring a special law to deal with sexual offences against
children which not only provided protection to children but also served as an effective deterrence to
the commission of these offences.
1.12 T ouching upon the significant features of the Bill, the Secretary informed the Committee that
it was for the first time in the history of criminal law, that the term ‘sexual harassment’ had been
defined very comprehensively which included stripping, blackmailing or stalking of a child with sexual
intent. So far, all such situations were addressed collectively under one provision of IPC, i.e. section
509 for outraging the modesty of a woman. Secondly, keeping in view the low conviction rate of
sexual offences against children, a presumption has been provided in the Bill that the accused in case
of sexual assault has committed the offence unless proved contrary. It was mentioned that such a
provision already existed in our law. Sections 113A and 114A of the Indian Evidence Act already create
presumptions in two situations, cruelty for dowry and for rape. Vulnerability of the victims and the
difficulty in collecting the evidence were the two factors leading to such a provision being incorporated
in the Bill. Misuse of such a provision had also been taken care of by including a safeguard therein.
1.13 The Committee observes that the Ministry’s National Study on Child Abuse in 2007 covering
13 States and the NCRB data of Sexual Offences against children in 2009 reveal some shocking
figures on child abuse in the country. According to the Ministry’s study of 2007, different forms of
child abuse were prevalent in the States covering physical abuse, sexual abuse including sexual assault,
emotional abuse and girl child neglect. Further, as per the data of NCRB for the year 2009, incidents
of rape were the most common form of sexual abuse against children followed by procurement of

4
minor girls, selling and buying of girls for prostitution with some of the States showing alarming
figures. The data also showed that among the States, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana,
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and
West Bengal reported higher number of rape cases of children. Among the Union Territories, Delhi
reported the highest number of rape incidents of children. The Committee also takes note of the
findings of the study conducted by the Ministry in 2007 which are quite alarming. Out of the 12,447
children of 13 States covered, Andhra Pradesh (72.89 %), Assam (86.26%) Bihar (67.64%) and Delhi
(72.26%) reported the highest percentage of sexual abuse among both boys and girls. The Committee
observes that both NCRB data (2009) and Study conducted by the Ministry (2007) do not reflect the
latest position. The Committee apprehends that the position at the ground level would have worsened.
Candid admission of the Ministry about the ineffectiveness of the existing laws compounded by the
prolonged process of incorporating the required provisions therein makes it amply clear that the
proposed legislation is the need of the hour.
1.14 The Committee, while taking note of the fact that there is no law to deal  comprehensively
sexual offences against children and in a way of discharging an obligation to the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Children which India  has ratified, welcomes the initiative of the
Ministry in drafting a special law  to deal with such offences against children proposing to
evolve child-friendly procedures  for investigation and handling of child-abuse cases. The
Committee understands that sexual offence of any kind not only harms the child physically
but also causes  long term damage to the mental state of the child.  Therefore, in addition to
providing for effective mechanism for handling child-related sexual offences through the
proposed legislation, there is an urgent need for initiating some  preventive measures so as to
ensure that chances of sexual exploitation of children remain minimum. Along with preventive
and protective safeguards, aspect of relief  and rehabilitation of these most vulnerable victims
will also have to be looked into. There are certain other very pertinent issues also which
require thoughtful  consideration before the Bill is translated into an Act. The Committee is
of the firm  view that objective of the proposed legislation will remain unfulfilled if both the
preventive and rehabilitative aspects remain sidelined. These issues need to be  addressed
within the Bill to the extent possible and through other mechanisms. All these issues have
been dealt with in detail at appropriate places in the Report.
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS
2.1 The Committee was informed that this Bill was an outcome of extensive consultations and
discussions with Ministries, State Governments, civil society, and experts. The need to address
offences against children came to the forefront during discussions relating to the commissioning of
the Study on Child Abuse: India 2007, which identified widespread abuse of children in the country.
The consultations, which were initiated in 2005, led to the conclusion that there was a need for
legislation on child abuse. The then Department of Women and Child Development prepared a Draft
Offences against Children Bill, 2005 in consultation with civil society participants and experts which
covered various offences against children, including, inter alia, sexual offences. The Draft Offences
against Children Bill, 2005 was sent to MHA for review by the Department in November, 2005. The
MHA was also requested to consider amendment to the IPC by incorporating the provisions of the
Draft Offences against Children Bill, 2005. However, MHA opined that as amendment to IPC was a
long-drawn process, a comprehensive legislation on child abuse may be considered by the Department.
The Bill of 2005 which was thereafter shared with the State Governments for their views and inputs
received support from them. Subsequently, the Bill was discussed through inter-ministerial consultations
in 2006-07.
2.2 The Committee was further informed that the Department of Legal Affairs returned the Bill
with the observation that most of the offences in the Bill were already covered under the existing laws,

5
and the purpose of bringing a new law was not clear. Some other major suggestions were also
received from the Ministries of Home Affairs and Labour and Employment. The Bill was, accordingly,
revised and sent to the Department of Legal Affairs, with the clarification that the purpose of bringing
the proposed legislation was to provide stringent punishment for various offences which were already
punishable under the existing Acts such as the IPC, Immoral Traffic Prevention Act, 1956, Information
& Technology Act, 2000, Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, etc. During mid 2007,
consultations held by the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) with India
Alliance for Child Rights, HAQ Centre for Child Rights, UNICEF and TULIR emphasized that instead
of having a separate Bill, appropriate changes could be made in CrPC, Evidence Act and additional
chapter/provision could be added in the IPC to address the requirements adequately. However, in view
of the findings of the Study on Child Abuse and the specific advice given by MHA on the need
for a separate law, the draft Bill was further discussed and revised by NCPCR between January-
September 2009.
2.3 In January 2010, NCPCR again held consultations with NGOs, legal experts, child right
activists and concerned government officers. A major change of opinion that emerged from these
consultations was that instead of a general legislation covering all offences against children, focus
should be on a Bill for Sexual Offences against children. It was felt that the relevant sections of IPC,
CrPC, Evidence Act and other laws could be amended concurrently to ensure that children were not
victimized further and justice was rendered in a time bound manner.
2.4 Meanwhile, the Ministry of Law and Justice in consultation with NGOs prepared a draft Bill
on Sexual Offences against Children and sent it to MWCD for further action. Discussions between
MWCD, Ministry of Law and Justice and NCPCR led to the conclusion that the Draft Bill on Sexual
Offences against Children be expanded to cover pornography and provide for more child friendly
procedures. Later in the second stage, the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000 would be expanded to include
other offences against children which were not addressed in any other law. Then, in September, 2010,
MWCD along with concerned Ministries and NCPCR prepared a draft Protection of Children from
Sexual Offences Bill, 2010 and circulated it to the concerned Ministries for comments. In November
2010, another draft Bill was prepared by NCPCR and shared with MWCD. Since then, MWCD has
revised the proposed Bill based on suggestions given by Ministries, State Governments/UTs and
NCPCR.
2.5 The Committee observes that the Ministry has held an extensive consultation exercise
since 2005 with a large number of stakeholders, concerned Ministries, the National Commission
for Protection of Child Rights, a statutory body having the mandate of protection of child
rights and organizations actively working for the cause of children. The Committee, however,
observes that there were a number of issues raised by many stakeholders before the Ministry
which required its consideration. During its deliberations, these suggestions/apprehensions were
again emphasized with conviction and collaborated by facts. The Committee has analyzed such
suggestions at the relevant places in the Report. The proposed legislation which is the final
outcome of such a prolonged exercise undertaken with involvement of all concerned is indeed
a welcome step.
2.6 The Committee also made an attempt to hear a number of stakeholders on this very important
piece of legislation. The Committee issued a Press Release on 8 June, 2011 for inviting views and
suggestions from the general public as well as the stakeholders on the proposed legislation. 15
memoranda raising pertinent issues received from the stakeholders were forwarded to the Ministry for
its comments. Besides hearing the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development on 18 August,
2011, the Committee also heard the views of the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights
in its meeting held on 30 September, 2011. The Committee also had the opportunity to interact with
other stakeholders from Civil Society Organizations and Child Right Agencies such as the HAQ Centre

6
for Child Rights, Tulir-Centre for Prevention and Healing of Child Sexual abuse, Indian Council for
Child Welfare, India Alliance for Child Rights, PRAYAS, MARG, Don Bosco National Forum for the
Young at Risk, SOS Children’s village and Save the Children–a Pro-Child Protection Coalition.
2.7 The Committee had a detailed interaction with the Chairperson and other representatives of the
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights on the proposed legislation in its meeting held on
30 September, 2011. The Chairperson of the Commission informed the Committee that NCPCR had
been receiving several complaints of sexual abuse of children since the last four years which
sometimes were of children as young as two years old. More compounding was the fact that most
of the cases were left unreported and were not even criminalized due to the intimidating process of
adjudication. The present judicial system was adult-centric and meant to adjudicate the cases of adults.
It was silent on the issue of children when they came in contact with the law. The Commission
strongly emphasized on the need to have a child-friendly judicial process especially for the children
who had been subjected to sexual offences or child labour. It was pointed out that the judicial process
of adjudication in the case of child victim should be the process of healing and not that of re-
victimization. The Commission held six consultations with judges, retired judges, lawyers, police
officers, social activists, academics, researchers etc in different parts of the country using the
infrastructure of National Law Universities. Practising criminal lawyers having the experience and
expertise of dealing with similar offences were also part of this exercise, besides that, the Commission
also made an effort to have a comparative analysis of jurisprudence in this regard in twelve countries.
2.8 The NCPCR had also drafted a Bill on the advice of the Ministry of Women and Child
Development and NAC which it shared with the Committee. The Committee was informed that there
were great similarities between the two drafts, like special courts, stand alone legislation and also quite
a large area of overlap and commonality. Broadly speaking, there were six areas where the Commission
and the Ministry had a different approach reflected in their respective drafts. Firstly, while in the
Ministry’s draft, offences were clubbed together, there was ‘fair labeling’ of offences in the Commission’s
draft. It was pointed out that precise definition of each offence would prove to be advantageous as
it would help the State to prosecute an offender for the particular offence committed and enhance
successful prosecution accordingly. The second major difference was non-criminalization of certain
sexual acts between children of tender age and simplifying the complexity of dealing with consent by
relying on a set of circumstances which make certain sexual acts unlawful in the NCPCR draft which
were not there in the Ministry draft. These circumstances were Force, Coercion, Threat, Impersonation,
Mistake, Intoxication, Undue advantage, when child is asleep/unconscious or against the will/consent
of the child. Thirdly, there was almost nothing in the Ministry draft corresponding to services of case
worker, child support services and Guardian ad litem provided for in the NCPCR draft. It was pointed
out that statutorily empowered adult supporters were must for the child through investigation, trial and
restitution, particularly under a system of criminal Justice Administration meant for adults. Fourthly,
as compared to the Ministry draft, NCPCR draft clearly delineated investigation and provided commonly
required types of protection to the child victim elaborately. Fifthly, NCPCR draft conceptualized a
comprehensive package of child friendly special measures and balanced the requirement of fair trial
for the accused also in careful detail. Lastly, NCPCR draft contemplated a compensation fund to be
accessed by the child as restitution for physical and mental injuries caused and completely delinked
it from conviction of the accused. Summing up her presentation, the Chairperson drew the attention
of the Committee to a very crucial aspect of having a Fund for providing some relief to child victims.
Keeping in view the financial constraints of State Governments, such a Fund needed to be set up by
the Central Government. It was suggested that a mechanism could be evolved whereby money could
be deposited in the court and the Guardian ad litem would be available in help the child victim access
compensation. Committee’s attention was also drawn to the schemes like Integrated Child Protection
Scheme whereunder case workers, counsellors, social workers, probation officers and other facilities
were already provided. Apprehensions about extra investments should, therefore, not be raised.

7
2.9 The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has undertaken wide ranging
consultation with NCPCR and various other stakeholders which drafting this legislation. It was
a good initiative to have a separate law to deal with sexual offences against children than
making amendments in the IPC. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the National
Commission for Protection of Child Rights in providing the alternative draft. The Committee
observes that although the Ministry has kept the draft Bill of NCPCR as the basis of this
legislation, many of the recommendations have not been incorporated in it. The Committee
has made an attempt to identify such recommendations and has incorporated some of them
at appropriate places in the proposed Bill.
2.10 The Committee has also taken note of the views/suggestions of the stakeholders on
various provisions of the Bill. Besides that, detailed questionnaire on the Bill was forwarded
to the Ministry and also to the stakeholders heard by the Committee for their comments.
Memoranda received in response to the Press  Release were also sent to the Ministry for its
response. All this feedback has proved to be of immense help to the Committee in formulating
its views on the various  provisions of the Bill. Committee’s deliberations with some organizations
actively engaged in the child welfare activities at the ground level for considerable period of
time proved very fruitful. Their experience and expertise of jurisprudence from the perspective
of child victims vis-à-vis adult victims gave a valuable insight to the  Committee to understand
the genesis of the proposed legislation, implications of its various provisions, problem-areas in
its implementation and the aspects remaining  uncovered.
III. IMPORTANT ISSUES/CONCERNS RAISED
3.1 The Committee during its interactions with stakeholders came across many issues/concerns
that required consideration. The Committee is of the view that these issues are very pertinent and have
adequate relevance so far as efficacy of the proposed legislation is concerned and, accordingly, need
to be reflected either in the proposed legislation itself or in the rules/guidelines to be framed thereunder.
These issues/concerns are as under:-
Rehabilitation, Compensation, Counselling and Support Services for the Victims
3.2 During its deliberations with various stakeholders and also through the memoranda received on
the Bill, one issue which kept on emerging time and again was that in addition to protection of child
victims, aspects like their rehabilitation, compensation, counseling and support services also needed to
be made part of the Bill. It was pointed out that focus was mainly on reporting, investigation and
prosecution, leaving out the rehabilitation, treatment, care, and counseling aspects altogether. It was
felt that these measures could help in minimizing the consequences of abuse and violence. Following
are the specific components which were suggested for incorporation in the proposed legislation:
– free and confidential counseling and support services for victims/survivors by professionally
trained counselors should be provided.
– a multi-disciplinary approach for the care, treatment and rehabilitation of child victims
was required.
– involvement of various professionals including doctors, counselors, social workers/NGOs
to ensure that the complex needs of the victim as well as her/his family is taken care of
– rehabilitation services should include-health interventions like medical care, trauma therapy
and individual, group or family counseling, social interventions like placement of the child
victim in foster care, supervision of families/foster families by child protection functionaries,
financial assistance-compensation to help the victim and family for treatment, support,
care and rehabilitation.

8
– creation of a fund towards survivor support and rehabilitation. The fine collected as
punishments can be transferred to this fund.
– clear guidelines on providing of compensation/rehabilitation by the State in addition to the
court orders.
– comprehensive victim support services to be integrated into ICPS at State and district
levels.
3.3 On this issue being taken up with the Ministry, it was clarified that the present Bill had been
introduced to deal with sexual offences against children effectively, besides moving towards establishing
child jurisprudence in the country. The larger issue of protection of victims and witnesses was a time-
consuming process and was beyond the scope of the present Bill. However, the Bill already includes
several child friendly provisions which had been framed keeping in view the best interest of the child
at all stages of the legal process. The Committee was also given to understand that a considered
decision had been taken to expand the scope of the Juvenile Justice Act to cover all other offences
against children, which were currently not addressed by any other law and to provide mechanisms
for care and support of children in need including child victims and witnesses of sexual offences.
3.4 The Committee is not convinced by the clarification given by the Ministry. The present
legislation addresses specific offences against children and has been brought forth from the
perspective of a child who is a victim of sexual abuse. The Committee strongly feels that
protection of children from sexual offences has to be seen in a wider perspective. Confining
it to confirmation of a sexual offence against a child followed by levying of punishment
through special courts is simply ignoring the real welfare of a child victim who may be in deep
trauma with no family support and thus fully exposed to further abuse. Every attempt both
at individual level and society level has to be made for enabling a child victim to become again
a happy normal child. To achieve this objective, a fully functional and effective institutional
mechanism has to be put in place and that can only done through making statutory provisions,
formulating rules and guidelines. The Committee observes that the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2000 is meant for all the children who require care and protection
due to their placement in certain situations as specified in the said Act. The JJ Act has detailed
provisions for relief and rehabilitation of such children. Under the Act state governments are
required to set up Child Welfare Committees, which are empowered to dispose of cases for
care, protection, treatment, development and rehabilitation of children and provide for their
basic needs and protection of human rights. There is also provision for children’s homes,
shelter homes and also a provision for rehabilitation and social reintegration.
3.5 The Committee was given to understand that the Juvenile Justice Law needs to be
strengthened or otherwise adequate provisions may be built into the proposed law referring to
the Juvenile Justice Law. The role of the District Child Protection Societies, Special Juvenile
Police Units, Child Welfare Committees, Welfare Officers and Probation Officers provided for
in the Juvenile Justice Law is critical in ensuring speedy recovery, social reintegration and
rehabilitation of child victims. Feedback made available to the Committee clearly indicates that
these institutional mechanisms under the Juvenile Justice Law are yet to be established in
many states and wherever established cannot be considered to be performing their mandated
task. The Committee would appreciate if an assessment of all such functionaries is made to
so as to have the real picture of the ground realities. Inputs provided to the Committee in
this regard can be easily acted upon in coordination with NCPCR and other stakeholders. The
Committee is of the view that an exclusive law on protection of children from sexual offences
should have all the allied aspects. However, mere inclusion of such provisions would not serve
the purpose. It has to be ensured that all the institutional arrangements are also made fully
functional.

9
Effective justice delivery process for child victims
3.6 While interacting with representatives of organizations working for child welfare, Committee’s
query about specific problem-areas being faced while providing legal support to child victims elicited
very serious shortcomings in the existing justice delivery process. It was mentioned that child-friendly
legal proceedings established through various Supreme Court and High Court judgments as well as
amendments to CrPC and Indian Evidence Act were not being properly followed. Some of the
drawbacks noticed are indicated below:
– Courts are not child-friendly and the whole atmosphere is intimidating.
– Lack of adequate legal provisions to cover all forms of sexual offences against children
and no protection at all for boys.
– Insensitive police, medical and court procedures.
– Delay in registering cases as well as in trials.
– Absence of counseling.
– Absence of legal aid by lawyers trained in child rights and child protection.
– Absence of services of translators and interpreters in courts.
– Victims invariably made to come to the courts on separate days for evidence and cross-
examination proceedings.
– Protection orders are rarely granted by the courts and when granted are flouted by the
police.
– Victim protection and witness assistance measures are highly inadequate.
– Lack of resources and infrastructure with law enforcement agencies and justice delivery
systems keeps them away from following child-friendly and child-sensitive procedures.
– Guidelines laid down to protect the privacy and confidentiality specially of victims of
sexual offences and children often flouted by media.
3.7 The Committee observes that while some of the problem-areas as indicated above have
been taken care of in the proposed legislation, it cannot be said that judicial process as
reflected therein would be child-friendly and sensitive to special needs of traumatized child
victims. The Committee would be making its observations/recommendations for modification of
proposed provisions/addition of new provisions in this regard in relevant paragraphs of the
Report.
Training of functionaries dealing with Child victims at different levels
3.8 One view-point which was emphatically raised by many stakeholders before the Committee
related to lack of sensitization and required training noticed in different functionaries involved in child
welfare activities. The Committee notes that this gap has also been commented upon in the Study on
Child Abuse conducted by the Ministry in 2007. The Committee has been informed that there is a well-
structured system of training programmes conducted by different authorities both at Government and
NGO level. Following are some of the training and capacity-building programmes being conducted at
present:
– Advanced Diploma Course on Child Guidance and Counseling and one-month Certificate
Course on Child Rights and Child Protection conducted by NIPCCD.

10
– Training for members of Juvenile Justice Boards, Child Welfare Committees, Police,
Social Welfare Officers, Probation Officers, institutional staff and NGOs working in the
field of Juvenile Justice conducted by the National Institute of Social Defence under the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
– Innovative and interactive Juvenile Justice training programmes for magistrates, judges
and members of JJBs and CWCs conducted by the National Judicial Academy, Bhopal.
– Basic and in-service training programmes for IPS officers at various levels conducted by
the Police Academics at Hyderabad and Shillong.
– Certificate, diploma and degree courses on human and child rights offered by several
Indian Universities/institutions.
3.9 The Committee appreciates the variety of mechanisms available for training of different
categories of functionaries. The Committee would, however, like to emphasize that it would be
appropriate to make an assessment of all the training programmes being conducted by
different agencies so as to ensure that benefits of such programmes are availed by all
concerned. Co-ordination and monitoring by the Ministry in this vital area will make the
difference.
Monitoring Mechanism
3.10 The Committee observes that formulation of any law undergoes a number of phases. Before
bringing any proposed legislation before the Parliament, consultation exercise with all the stakeholders
is undertaken, and after the Parliament scrutiny, the law gets enacted. However, fulfillment of the
objectives of the law is the real test. This can be achieved only on the implementation of the law with
benefits reaching those for whom it was enacted. Nobody can deny that monitoring at different levels
is the most crucial component especially for laws like the proposed legislation meant for the most
vulnerable segment of the society. On this issue being raised with the stakeholders, a number of
suggestions were put forth before the Committee, as indicated below:
– A Committee of experts comprising of medical, legal and social work professionals along
with Government enforcement authorities to be appointed at the state and district level
to advise the State Governments and periodically review the implementation of the Act.
– High Courts and District Courts to periodically review the performance of the Designated
Special Court under this Act.
– A group of lawyers, social work and counseling professionals to be made available for
the courts and victims of abuse to avail free services and the State Government to pay
for these services.
– The Ministries of Home Affairs Law and Justice and Women and Child Development in
consultation with the Chief Justice of various High Courts will have to evolve a
mechanism to monitor the cases as they traverse through the Criminal Justice System.
– Periodic monitoring and evaluation mechanism regarding the implementation of the
proposed legislation may be developed by NCPCR and SCPCRS and the details may be
included in the Rules to be prescribed under the Act.
– NALSA and State Legal Services Authorities can be given the responsibility of monitoring.
3.11 The Committee understands that on Juvenile Justice, the Supreme Court had decided to
designate a High Court Judge or a Committee of High Court Judges in every state to monitor
the implementation of the Juvenile Justice Act. Wherever such Committees exist, there has

11
been a great improvement. The Committee feels that a similar mechanism for this Bill will also
be required. Perhaps the mandate of Juvenile Justice Committees of High Courts can be
extended with suitable adaption to cover matters of sexual offences against children also. The
Committee strongly feels that an effective and functional/monitoring mechanism will have to be
evolved for the proposed law. The above suggestions given by stakeholders working in the field
deserve full attention by the Ministry as well as the implementing agencies. The Committee
would appreciate if the Ministry initiates action for having a monitoring mechanism in advance.
Public awareness about the Act
3.12 In view of the proposed legislation being a special criminal and social law, the Committee
is of the view that society as a whole and all concerned envisaged for its implementation and
also the children to the extent possible will have to be made aware about its mandate and
outreach. The Committee will like to draw the attention of the Ministry to the following steps
which can be taken:
– easy to understand materials in regional languages on the law need to be developed
– Workshops specially seminars for implementing agencies can be organized.
– Both children as well as their parents/guardians to be sensitized about the subject
of sexual offences against children and the law with the objective of empowering
them about their rights and duties.
3.13 The Committee is also of the view that as in the Protection of Women from  Domestic
Violence Act, 2005, a provision may be incorporated in the Bill which would place an obligation
on Central and State Governments to spread awareness  through different means and mechanism.
Role of NCPCR/SCPCR
3.13 The Committee observes that in the present Bill, no role has been envisaged for the National
Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) and State Commissions for Protection of Child
Rights (SCPCR). As a monitoring body, NCPCR is already looking into the enforcement part of the
existing laws as well as the complaints of the child abuse. NCPCR during its deposition before the
Committee had strongly argued that they monitor the gaps and lapses in the implementation of the law
and also spread public awareness on child sexual abuse.
The Committee observes that NCPCR has been mandated to take suo-motu notice of the
following:
– deprivation and violation of child rights;
– non-implementation of laws providing for protection and development of children; and
– non-compliance of policy decisions, guidelines or instructions aimed at mitigating hardships
to and ensuring welfare of children and to provide relief to such children.
The Committee also feels that keeping in view the tasks assigned to it,  NCPCR may be
rightfully considered for a monitoring role under this Bill as envisaged to it under section 31
of the RTE Act, 2009. The NCPCR could widely publicize the provisions of the Bill and could
get appropriate training and orientation programmes organized for concerned stakeholders. It
may also undertake a periodic evaluation study of the implementation of the proposed
legislation and recommend corrective measures to fill in the gaps in its implementation.
Similar role could be envisaged for SCPCRs also. Details for periodic monitoring and evaluation
mechanism could be provided in the Rules to be framed under the Act.

12
IV. The Committee makes the following observations/recommendations on some provisions
of the Bill
Clause 1 : Short title, extent and commencement
4.1 Sub clause (1) dealing with short title of the Act reads as follows:-
“This Act may be called the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2011”.
4.2 It was pointed out by the stakeholders that the “preventive aspect” has not been given due
importance in the Bill. It focused more on the situations where sexual violence, abuse, exploitation of
the child had already taken place. It was argued that prevention was always better than cure especially
when it was about sexual abuse of a child. It was, accordingly, suggested that the title of the Bill
should be “the Protection of Children and Prevention of Sexual Offences Bill, 2011”.
4.4 Keeping in mind the mandate of our Constitution and our commitment to international
conventions, it is incumbent upon the State to create an environment or a culture where
children feel safe and secure. Our first commitment towards achieving this should be
sensitizing vulnerable children about sexual offences. This could be done by incorporating an
education module on sex education in the school education system itself. Besides that, all
those involved in the bringing up of children and responsible for their education have to be
sensitized about the vulnerability of children and need for protecting them from sexual
offences. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that strong protective and preventive
measures may be incorporated in the Bill itself to the extent possible and if need be, in the
rules and guidelines to be made thereunder to prevent the instances of sexual offences
against children. Specific provisions/mechanism for sensitizing children, parents, teachers,
peers should be prescribed. The Committee, therefore, suggests that preventive aspect has
to be reflected in the Bill by incorporating appropriate/relevant provisions thereunder.
However, the Committee feels that the proposed title of the Bill already covers both
preventive and protective aspects. With the interpretation in the right perspective, preventive
aspects can easily be included under the Bill. Thus, no change is required to be made in the
title of the Bill.
V. Clause 2 : Definitions
5.1 Clause 2 of the Bill deals with definitions. Sub-clause 2(d) defines the term ‘child’ as “any
person below the age of eighteen years save as provided otherwise”.
5.2 It was pointed out that the words “save as provided otherwise” should be deleted from the
provision to remove any misunderstanding or confusion. The proposed definition tended to create an
exception which was not required.
5.3 The Ministry justified the wording by stating that it was not always the adult who committed
an offence against the child. There was a need to protect children from sexual abuse by their own
peers and relatively older children. Further, the definition was in consonance with the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 and the United Nation Convention on the Rights of the
Child (UNCRC) to which India was a party.
5.4 The Committee observes that the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of children)
Act, 2000 also defines the juvenile or child as a person who has not completed eighteen years
of age. This definition is not qualified by the words “save as otherwise provided”. On the same
analogy, the Committee also feels that the words” save as otherwise provided” be removed
from the provision to avoid any misunderstanding.

13
5.5 Clause 2(i) defines the term ‘shared household’ to read as follows:-
“Shared household means a household where the person charged with the offence lives in a
domestic relationship with the parent of the child and the child”.
5.6 Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that the definition would not be covering a
situation where the parents of the child affected were deceased or otherwise absent from the house.
Further, it was not necessary that the parents resided in the same household as the child. Therefore,
it was suggested to amend the definition of shared household to read “shared household means the
household where the person charged with the offence lives or at any stage has lived in a domestic
relationship with the child”. The Ministry reasoned that under the Protection of Women from Domestic
Violence Act, 2005, the domestic relationship meant a relationship between two persons who lived or
had at any point of time lived together in a shared household, who were related by consanguinity,
marriage or through a relationship in the nature of marriage, adoption or were family members living
together as a joint family.” This formed part of the relationship covered with respect to the child
victim under section 4(n) and was used to identify adult offenders who were related to the child either
directly or through the child’s parents.
5.7 The Committee feels that the definition of the term “shared household” in  the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 pertains to ownership, right, title,
interest and equity of the household by the aggrieved person or the  respondent or both. The
purpose of the definition of “shared household” in the proposed legislation is vastly different
from that of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that the  suggested amended definition be included in the Bill.
5.8 Clause 2(j) of the Bill defines the term Special Court to mean “a court designated as such
under section 28.
5.9 The Committee notes that the proposed law primarily emanates from our 1992 ratification to
UNCRC 1989 after which the Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 was enacted.
Under section 25 of the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act, State Governments
have the option of setting up of the Special Court. Similarly, the proposed legislation also envisages
the setting up of Special Courts under clause 28 and, accordingly, the definition has been provided
under clause 2(i). It was pointed out that the Special Courts set up under the NCPCR Act and Special
Courts envisaged under the proposed legislation would not only be having the same status but also
there was a likelihood of overlapping so far as their domain was concerned. It was, accordingly,
suggested that there should be no distinction between the Special Courts set up under the two laws.
It would result in better coordination and smooth functioning, thereby leading to viable and effective
justice delivery system. The following definition of term’ Special Court’ under clause 2(j) was
suggested:
“Special Court means a Children’ s Court designated as per section 25  of the Commissions for
Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 and as such under section 28 of this Act.”
It was also indicated that on the same analogy, Special Court as provided under section 28 and the
related procedures and powers of a Special Court provided in Sections 33 to 38 of the Act means
a Children’s Court as designated under Clause 25 of the CPCR Act. On this suggestion being taken
up with the Ministry, it was indicated that without any modification in the definition of the term
‘Special Court’ given in clause 2(i), the applicability of Children’s Courts set up under the CPCR Act
on the proposed legislation may be included as a proviso in clause 28(1) in the following manner:
“Provided that if a court of session is already notified as a Children’ s Court under the CPCR
Act and/or Special Court under any other law for the time bring in force then it shall be
deemed to be a Special Court within the provisions of this Act.”

14
5.10 The Committee observes that it is a fact that creation of multiple courts/legal
infrastructures will serve no useful purpose. Wherever, the legal framework has been created
under the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 the same should be used for
the purposes of the proposed law. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that proviso to
clause 28(1) as mentioned above may be added.
VI. Clause 3 : — Penetrative Sexual Assault
Clause 7 : — Sexual Assault
6.1 Chapter II of the Bill deals with sexual offences against children and punishments prescribed
therefore. Sexual offences have been specified in five categories. Clauses 3 and 7 deal with the two
categories that specify the different kinds of assault. During the course of deliberations with various
stakeholders, very pertinent and serious reservations were voiced on these two provisions. The first
reservation voiced by NCPCR related to generality of the term ‘penetrative sexual assault’, giving no
indication of the content of offence. It was also pointed out that the word ‘assault’ connoted a far
lesser offence under the penal law, thereby undermining the gravity of the offences sought to be
proscribed by this provision. It was felt that neither the nature of the wrong-doing nor the harm
inflicted on the victim was being conveyed due to such a term being used. It was, accordingly,
suggested that distinct offences be labeled individually instead of being grouped together under a
general term like ‘penetrative sexual assault’. Similar objections were raised with regard to clause 7
relating to ‘sexual assault’. It was felt that this definition grouped offences which were clearly
perverse with those which may seem relatively innocuous and may hence require different degrees of
punishment. It was also contended by NCPCR that across the world such conceptualization of sexual
offences was now considered inadequate and hence the broader category of penetrative sexual
offences was found acceptable. Since the law was to be dealt with by police and lawyers, it was
essential that the crimes were described clearly. Generic terms, such as, sexual assault could cause
confusion both for the investigation agencies and the courts.
6.2 On this issue being taken up with the Ministry, the Committee was informed that very explicit
words and expressions had been used by NCPCR for describing offences. These descriptions were
unduly offensive without any added value in terms of clarity. It was pointed out that while fair labeling
of offences and clear definitions were desirable, use of unduly explicit and offensive descriptions could
be counter-productive and might invite criticism, Ministry’s viewpoint was that the offence of
penetrative sexual assault in their Bill covered all the situations that were in the NCPCR Bill.
6.3 The Committee is inclined to agree with the justification given by the Ministry with
regard to clauses 3 and 7 relating to penetrative sexual assault and sexual assault respectively.
The Committee is also of the view that sexual offences as defined in clauses 3 and 7 cover
all the likely situations to be covered thereunder. The Committee would like to point out that
Indian culture and our society even today, inspite of great advancement and global connectivity
leading to exposure to western culture, retain their special identity which cannot be as open
as the western world so far as the subject of the proposed legislation is concerned.
6.4 Another objection raised was that sexual offences as defined indicated a male bias,
ignoring the fact that even a boy could be a victim. The Committee notes that as per the
General Clauses Act, 1897 in all Central Acts and Regulations, unless there is any thing
repugnant in the subject or context, words importing the masculine gender shall be taken to
include females.
6.5 Committee’s attention was drawn to the following identical proviso to clauses 3 and 7:-
“Provided that where such penetrative sexual assault is committed against a child between
sixteen to eighteen years of age it shall be considered whether the consent for such an act has

15
been obtained against the will of the child or the consent has been obtained by use of
violence, force, threat to use force, intoxicants, drugs, impersonation, fraud, deceit, coercion,
undue influence, threats, when the child is sleeping or unconscious or where the child does not
have the capacity to understand the nature of the act or to resist it.”
6.6 It was contended by the stakeholders that the proposed provisos were completely erroneous,
misleading and against the interests of the children. Such a provision would completely negate our legal
commitments under UNCRC 1989/1992 and JJ Act, 2000/2006. Whereas the declared age of the child
in these enactments was 18 years, in the proposed legislation for children between 16-18 years, these
provisions were not made applicable on them. Clause 2(d) of the Bill defines ‘child’ as any person
below the age of 18 years, which is the declared age of the child in other similar enactments. The
provisos convey that children between the ages of 16-18 years are to be treated differently and can
be outside the ambit of the provision. It was further stated that this provision had been borrowed from
section 375 of IPC in which a man did not commit rape while having sexual intercourse with the
woman of 16 -18 years if there was a consent for the same. Another argument given against having
the component of consent for children between 16-18 years was that it would invariably lead to cross-
examination of a victim and would make the entire trial process central to the conduct of the victim
rather than that of the accused. It was felt that unequivocal voluntary agreement for a specific and
limited act only could be dangerous as it would put the victim to unnecessary questioning to decide
on whether the sexual act that took place was different form the one for which willingness was
expressed. Another discrepancy pointed out by the stakeholders was that for much graver crimes like
‘penetrative sexual assault in clause 3 and ‘sexual assault’ in clause 7, the age of the child has been
kept at 16 years and for a much milder form of crime i.e. sexual harassment in clause 11 the age
of the child has been kept 18 years.
6.7 Justifying the provisions, the Ministry clarified that the definition of ‘child’ and the age of
consent for sexual activity were two different issues. There was no contradiction in the definition of
‘child’ as provided in clause 2 (d) and the age group mentioned in clauses 3 and 7 as the age of
consent had been kept at 16 years consistent with the provisions of section 375 and 377 of the IPC.
The Bill also provided for a uniform age of consent for all the children irrespective of gender. Another
justification put forth by the Ministry was that emerging social reality regarding awareness, understanding
and exposure of the adolescents cannot be overlooked and it would cause more detriment to
criminalize consensual action by children between 16 to 18 years of age.
6.8 The Committee notes that other enactments such as the Indian Majority Act, 1875, the Indian
Contract Act and the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 define child as the
one who has not completed 18 years of age. Further, the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006
stipulates that child means a person who, if a male has not completed 21 years of age, and if a female,
has not completed 18 years of age. Only in the Immoral Traffic Prevention Act, 1986 a child has been
defined as a person below 16 years of age. It can, therefore, be concluded that for most of the
enactments a child means a person below 18 years of age. The Committee would also like to point
out that the contention of the Ministry that the age of consent kept at 16 years in clauses 3 and 7
is consistent with the provisions under IPC cannot be considered correct. A reading of section 375
of IPC clearly indicates that out of the six descriptions of rape given thereunder, only one condition
mentions the age factor which says a rape will be committed with or without consent when the
woman is under sixteen years of age. Section 375 of IPC would operate in totally different
circumstances when compared with the provisions in clauses 3 and 7 of the present Bill. The
Committee is of the view that once the age of child has been specified as 18 years, the
element of consent should be treated as irrelevant up to this age. Therefore, the provisos to
clauses 3 and 7 of the Bill should be deleted to protect the rights of child and for the sake
of protecting children against abuse. This would also be in consonance with the country’s
commitment towards UNCRC and the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000.

16
6.9 The Committee has also a word of caution. By having the element of consent, the focus
would be on the victim which would invariably lead to revictimisation of the victim in the
hands of the justice delivery process and would be especially problematic when dealing with
children. The Committee would like to point out that a great deal of jurisprudence supports
the theory that law should move away from this classical approach of trials in such cases and
focus on the conduct of the accused and the circumstances surrounding the offence rather than
the conduct of the victim thereby obviating the necessity of lengthy cross-examination of the
victim on the issue of consent.
VII. Clause 5 : Aggravated Penetrative Sexual Assault and clause 9 : Aggravated Sexual
Assault
7.1 Clauses 5 and 9 define the offence of aggravated penetrative sexual assault and aggravated
sexual assault respectively. Different situations which would establish the commitment of aggravated
sexual assault have been specified in these two provisions.
7.2 Clauses 5(a) and (b) and 9(a) and 9(b) refer  to a police officer and a member of the armed
forces or security forces who commit penetrative sexual assault/sexual assault in different situations.
It was pointed out that it was important to recognize victimization due to authority and control
exercised by the police and the armed forces or security forces. There may be a situation where a
subordinate personnel who was having custody of the child on behalf of his superior committed
penetrative sexual assault/sexual assault. Therefore, clauses 5(a) and (b) and 9(a) and (b) should read
as “on a child in his custody or in the custody of police/personnel of the security forces subordinate
to him”. Another aspect pointed out was that the superiors who failed to use their position to protect
the child should also be penalized.
7.3 The Committee feels that the concerns raised by the stakeholders are valid as these
clauses appear to be restrictive and would not cover the situation where a subordinate
personnel may take the child in his custody. Therefore the amendment as suggested above
may be carried out.
7.4 Clauses 5(d) and 9( d) enumerate places where aggravated penetrative sexual assault/aggravated
sexual assault on a child may take place. The clause reads:-
“whoever being on the management or on the staff of a jail, remand home, protection home,
observation home, or other place of custody or care and protection established by or under any
law for the time being in force, commits penetrative sexual assault on a child, being inmate
of such jail, remand home, protection home, observation home, or other place of custody or
care and protection”.
7.5 The concern of the stakeholders was that to ensure that children were protected in all settings,
it was important to specifically include certain settings that tend to get overlooked. It was, therefore,
proposed that the clause may be amended to read:
“whoever being on the management or on the staff of a jail, special home, observation home,
protection home or other place of custody or care established by or under any law for the time
being in force including a reception centre or institution working with women and children with
mental and/or physical disabilities, commits penetrative sexual assault on any child being
inmate of such jail, special home, place or institution; or, other place of custody or care and
protection.”
7.6 The Ministry, justifying the provision stated that this provision covered many places of
custody or care and protection. There could be many such places and it was not possible to list
all and it may not be feasible to name them all in the clause. The words, “or other place of
custody or care and protection” cover all possible places of care and protection. The Committee,

17
however, observes that the provision may be made more expressive to cover all possible places
where penetrative sexual assault/sexual assault may take place on a child. The Committee
accepts that there may be places still left uncovered which can be taken care of under the
general phrase occurring at the end to the provision. Clauses 5(d) and 9(d) may be substituted
as indicated above.
7.7 Clause 5(f) reads as follows:-
“whoever being on the management or staff of an educational institution, commits penetrative
sexual assault on a child in that institution; or”.
Clause 9(f) is also similarly worded.
7.8 It was suggested to expand the scope of this clause to include family/independent doctors,
NGOs, individual priests/pujaris/maulanas and religious institutions where children specially young
males were sent and were placed in the hands of the heads of Muths, Madarasas and Monasteries.
The Committee is of the view that along with educational institutions, religious institutions may also
be brought under these two provisions. Necessary changes may, accordingly, be made these sub-
clauses.
7.9 Clause 5(g) refers to gang penetrative sexual assault. Similar provision is there in clause 9(g)
also.
7.10 It was observed by the stakeholders that gang penetrative sexual assault needs an explanation
to clarify what constituted a gang. It was contended that such an explanation was necessary because
it was the first time that such a terminology had been used in the context of sexual assault. On this
issue being taken up with the Ministry, it was suggested that the following explanation may be added
to the provision:
“Where a child is subjected to sexual assault by one or more in a group of persons acting in
furtherance of their common intention, each of such persons shall be deemed to have
committed gang penetrative sexual assault within the meaning of this sub- section”.
The Committee recommends that clauses  5(g) and 9(g) may be modified accordingly.
7.11 Clauses 5(h) and 9(h) refer to use of deadly weapons fire, heated substance or corrosive
substance while committing penetrative sexual assault/sexual assault.
7.12 It was felt that any qualification of weapons would be unnecessary and that the clauses should
just read “commits penetrative sexual assault/sexual assault with weapons, instruments or substances”.
Ministry’s clarification was that the expression ‘deadly weapons, fire, heated or corrosive substance’
was added only after detailed consultations with NCPCR and other stakeholders and removing these
qualifications would not make any difference to substantive offence defined in these sub-clauses. The
Committee also feels these provisions require to be made more elaborative and therefore, may
remain included as proposed.
7.13 Clauses 5(i) and 9(i) read “whoever commits penetrative sexual assault/sexual assault causing
grievous hurt or causing injury to the sexual organs of the child;”
7.14 It was strongly argued by the stakeholders that the wording of these two clauses gives the
impression that grievous hurt or injury was confined to the sexual organs of a child. This should be
changed to ensure that the provision covered grievous hurt or injury to other or any part of the body
of child. The Committee also feels that the clause was required to be stated comprehensively to cover
grievous injury to other body parts of the child as well. The Committee, accordingly, suggests that
the clause may be amended as follows:-

18
“Whoever commits penetrative sexual assault/sexual assault causing grievous hurt to the child
or causing bodily harm and injury including injury to the sexual organs of the child”.
7.15 Clause 5(j) and 9(j) provide that whoever commits penetrative sexual assault/sexual assault on
a child, which—
(i) physically incapacitates the child or causes the child to become mentally ill or to become
mentally unfit to perform regular tasks. temporarily or permanently: or
(ii) in the case of female child, makes the child pregnant as a consequence of sexual assault;
(iii) inflicts the child with Human Immunodeficiency Virus or any other life threatening disease
or infection ‘which may either temporarily or permanently impair the child by rendering him
physically incapacitated, mentally ill or mentally unfit to perform regular tasks: or
7.16 The stakeholders raised strong objections to the wording of these sub-clauses. The words “or
to become mentally unfit to perform regular tasks temporarily or permanently” were said to be
conveying wrongly the impaired functioning caused by mental trauma affecting the well being of the
victim. It was suggested that these sub-clauses can be divided as (i) physically incapacitates the child;
or (ii) causes the child to become mentally ill as defined under the Mental Health Act, 1987. The
Committee also feels physical and mental incapacity are two different issues and usually
mental trauma is not indicated through obvious manifestations but is understood through
various behavioural and emotional indicators and to assess the mental incapacity trained
professionals are required. Therefore, the Committee suggests that the clauses 5(j) and 9(j)
may be reworded as “Physically incapacitates the child or causes the child to become mentally
ill as defined under the Mental Health Act, 1987 or causes impairment so as to render the
child unfit to perform regular tasks, temporarily or permanently.”
7.17 Clauses 5(s) and 9(s) refer to sectarian violence and read “whoever commits penetrative sexual
assault/sexual assault on a child in the course of communal or sectarian violence;”
7.18 Some reservations were expressed by the stakeholders regarding the term ‘sectarian violence’.
It was suggested that it would be useful to explain the term sectarian violence. The clarification given
by the Ministry was that the interpretation of situations of sectarian violence may be best left to the
judgement of the courts and that this Bill was not the right place to attempt a definition of sectarian
violence. The Committee agrees with the Ministry’s stand.
7.19 The Committee also feels that some provision protecting the interests of Children
belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes should be added to the clause. The
Committee’s recommendation is based on the premise that SCs/STs are still marginalized
groups in the society and there are cultural and social practices that make them more
vulnerable to sectarian violence. Accordingly change may be effected in clause 5(s) and 9(s).
The Committee would also like to mention that as indicated by some stakeholders, clauses 5
and 9 do not address harmful cultural practices which are considered legitimate within certain
communities which may harm generations of children within that community. The Committee
notes that such protection has been afforded to adults under the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled
Tribe (Prevention of Atrocities) Act and hence ought not to be taken away from children. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that appropriate provision covering such situations may
be added under clauses 5 and 9. Another suggestion which came before the Committee was the
addition of the following provision under clauses 5 and 9:
Whoever commits penetrative sexual assault/sexual assault on a child and makes the child to
strip and/or parade naked in public.
The Committee notes that the above suggestion has been found acceptable by the
Ministry.

19
VIII. Clause : 16 Abetment of an offence
8.1 Clause 16 provides for the definition of the term ‘abetment of an offence’ as follows:-
A person abets an offence if he instigates any person to do that offence: or engages ‘with
one or more other person or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that offences, if any
act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to the doing
of that offences; or intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that
offences.
8.2 It further clarifies that a person who, by willful misrepresentation, or by willful concealment
of a material fact, which he is bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to cause
or procure a thing to be doe, is said to instigate the doing of that offence. It also clarifies that
whoever, either prior to or at the time of commission of an act, does anything in order to facilitate
the commission of that act and thereby facilitates the commission thereof, is said to aid the doing of
that act.
8.3 It was pointed out by some of the stakeholders that instead of laying down a detailed section
on abetment, including punishment for abetment, only a reference of sections 107, 108 and 109 of
IPC should be made in clauses 16 and 17. The Committee. however, finds no harm in having self-
contained provisions on abetment in the Bill.
8.4 One of the stakeholders heard by the Committee strongly advocated inclusion of human
trafficking under the provision of this clause. It was felt that such an inclusion would result in
commercialization of sexual abuse of children being dealt with firmly and without any loopholes in
such instances. Following new clause 16 A was suggested for addition after clause 16:
“Whoever aids or abets any offence under this Act by way of human trafficking in children,
running brothels or providing facility to run brothels, facilitate or allow continuing offences
against children in their own premises, pimps, the financiers, transporters, those who keep the
children in view of committing an offence and everyone who helps in the process, either by
active support, or neglect of their duty to take immediate action as are the investigating and
enforcement officers or who receive favours for not acting to prevent offences against children
or to protect them, shall be treated as having committed such offence or as continuing to
commit such offence.”
8.5 The Committee observes that the problem of child trafficking has very serious dimensions due
to the increasing number of such cases. It was informed that the Government of India has estimated
that more than 30,000 child prostitutes were trapped alone in six metro cities. Children were being
trafficked in large numbers for forced labour, for sale in brothel houses, for marriage, adoption etc.
Child trafficking which took place at inter-district, inter-state and inter country levels was very much
associated with demand and supply trends with profit as the prime motive. The Committee was
informed that a Protocol for Pre-Rescue, Rescue and Post-Rescue Operations of Child Victims of
Trafficking for Commercial Sexual Exploitation was formulated in 2005. This Protocol being widely
used by State Governments contains a strategy for rescue teams concerning pre-rescue, rescue and
post-rescue operations and for rehabilitation of children, who are victims of trafficking for commercial
sexual exploitation.
8.6 The Committee was given to understand that the term ‘trafficking’ itself has not been legally
defined under any Act. There, was only one legislation i.e. the Prevention of Immoral Trafficking
Practices Act which dealt with trafficking and sale of children in the brothel houses. Its tardy
implementation had so far failed to make any visible impact. The Committee feels that this serious
problem involving many complexities has to be dealt with by the use of effective legislative
provisions with an in built monitoring mechanism and required implementing agencies in place.

20
8.7 The Committee is of the view that with increasing trend of child trafficking cases and
no exclusive legal mechanism therefore, there is a need for taking some initiative in this
direction. It is true that child trafficking cases may not always relate to sexual exploitation,
but whenever there is such an instance, it has to be curbed effectively for which legal support
is essential. The proposed legislation deals with all kinds of sexual assaults and harassments
mainly on individual basis. However, in child trafficking cases, the perpetrator may not be
directly considered an offender. This category of sexual exploitation of child victims has also
to be addressed. Accordingly, inclusion of a viable provision as indicated above in clause 16 can
be the first move in this direction. The Committee would also like to point that since India
has ratified the Convention on Transitional Organized Crimes and its Optional Protocol on
trafficking in human beings, it becomes even more necessary to define ‘child trafficking for
sexual purposes’ in the proposed legislation. The Committee notes that UK has a special
legislation called the UK Sexual Offences Act, 2003 which contains detailed provisions on
trafficking. This law defines three categories of trafficking-trafficking into the UK for sexual
exploitation, trafficking within the UK for sexual exploitation and trafficking out of the UK for
sexual exploitation. The Committee feels that these provisions may be adapted in line with
ground realities in our country in the proposed law for protecting of child victims. Another
allied aspect which relates to child trafficking cases is the preventive measures for such
violations. Here also UK law has a special  provision. The Committee would appreciate if this
area is also covered under the proposed legislation.
IX. Clause 19 : Reporting of offences
9.1 Clause 19 which makes provision for reporting of offences reads as under:-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,  any person
(including the child), who apprehends that an offence under this Act is likely to be committed or has
knowledge that such an offence has been committed, he shall provide such information to-
(a) the Special Juvenile Police Unit; or
(b) the local police;
(2) Every report given under sub-section (1)  shall be-
(a) ascribed an entry number and recorded in writing;
(b) be read over to the informant;
(c) shall be entered in a book to be kept by the Police Unit.
(3) Where the report under sub-section (1)  is given by a child, the same shall be recorded under sub-
section (2)  in a simple language so that the child understands contents being recorded.
(4) In case contents are being recorded in the language not understood by the child or wherever it
is deemed necessary, a translator or an interpreter shall be provided to the child if he fails to
understand the same.
(5) Where the Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police is satisfied that the child against whom
an offence has been committed is in need of care and protection, then, it shall, after recording the
reasons in writing, make immediate arrangement to give him such care and protection (including
admitting the child into shelter home or to the nearest hospital) within twenty-four hours of the report,
as may be required.
(6) The Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police shall, without unnecessary delay but within a
period of twenty-four hours, report the matter to the Special Court or where no Special Court has been

21
designated, to the Court of Session, including need of the child for care and protection and steps taken
in this regard.
9.2 Strong objections were raised by the stakeholders on the proposed provision. It was felt that
a child could not be made responsible for reporting the offence on an apprehension that an offence
was likely to be committed. NCPCR was of the view that firstly such a reporting on the part of the
child (whether as a victim or a witness) should be optional and not mandatory. As a general rule,
mandatory reporting was counter-productive. Secondly, it may hinder children and parents from
seeking professional help, like medical or psychiatric services. Thirdly, provision for an interpreter or
translator may prove to be of help only when a child did not know language. But it may not be
sufficient in all circumstances specially when the child was disabled.
9.3 The other objection raised was that police may not be the best placed agency to assess
whether the child required care and protection. Accordingly, it was suggested that it would be more
suitable to shift these functions to another agency consisting of specialists who were better equipped
to make such an evaluation. It was felt that duties of police may be specified; indicating the action
to be taken by them at every step. The police on receipt of a complaint should call upon a case
worker to provide support to the child. The case worker, then, would ensure medical examination,
paper work, for forensic tests, counsel the child for seeking appointment of a Guardian-ad-litem
through the Special Court. Report giving full details of assistance provided to the child will have to
be submitted within 24 hours.
9.4 Another viewpoint put forth before the Committee was that reporting of offences should not
be confined to only two authorities, i.e. Special Juvenile Police Unit and the local police. It was
suggested that the Child Welfare Committee, Childline and the District Child Protection Officer may
also be the designated authorities for reporting of sexual offences. However, it was pointed out by the
Ministry that the Special Juvenile Police Unit or the local police was the competent authority for
lodging c complaint under the law and initiating further legal process. Besides that, a complaint made
to the Child Welfare Committee or Childline would also have to be forwarded to the SJPU or the local
police as they were the best facilitators for this purpose. It was also clarified that including them as
reporting authorities may be misleading and also lead to delay in reporting of cases.
9.5 The Committee notes that as per section 63 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2000, the Special Juvenile Police Unit (SJPU) is to be set-up in each district. The unit
consists of a Child Welfare Officer of the rank of police inspector and two paid social workers having
experience of working in the field of child welfare, one of whom is a woman. The Child Welfare
Officer is a person with aptitude and appropriate training and orientation to handle the cases of
children. The SJPU co-coordinates and functions as a watch-dog for providing legal protection against
all kinds of cruelty, abuse and exploitation of child at the district level.
9.6 As informed by the Ministry, there were 660 SJPUs operating across the country. However,
the feedback given by some stakeholders indicated that SJPUs were not functional in all the states and
were not performing their mandated task. The Committee is not aware whether any assessment
about the functioning of SJPUs has been made either by the Ministry or any independent
agency so far. If not, it is high time that such a study is got conducted so as to know whether
such units have been set up in each district and wherever set up about their functional status.
It is all the more required in view of the fact that mandate of SJPUs is going to be expanded
under the proposed legislation. The Committee would also like to point out that the Child
Welfare Committees set up in each district of the country under section 29 of the JJ Act are
the final authority to dispose of cases for the care, protection, treatment, development and
rehabilitation of children as well as to provide for their basic needs and protection of human
rights. To say that these Committees will also have to report complaints of sexual offence to
SJPU s or the local police does not seem to be the right argument. The Committee would like

22
to point out that under section 32 of the JJ Act, besides any public servant, childline social
worker, any child in need of care and protection may be produced before the Child Welfare
Committee by any police officer or SJPU or designated police officer. Therefore, it would be
in the fitness of things if the Child Welfare Committees like SJPUs or local police also become
the designated authority to receive complaint from the child and report the matter to the
Special Court after completing all the procedural formalities. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Child Welfare Committee may also be included under clause 19(1).
9.7 The Committee’s attention was also drawn to the fact that as indicated in clause 19(1),
listing apprehension as one of the factors for reporting child abuse cases was too far-fatched.
Assessing apprehension itself may not be easy and that too by a child. The Committee,
therefore, would like the Ministry to reassess this provision. Another very pertinent issue raised
was that the general public should be encouraged to report freely but their identities should remain
confidential. There should be a provision  on protection of a person reporting in good faith on the same
pattern as the provision under the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005.
9.8 So far as reporting by general public is concerned, the Committee feels that general
public should be encouraged to report and reporting in good faith must not invite civil or
criminal liability. The Committee, accordingly, suggests that clause 19(2) may be re-worded as
“No liability civil or criminal shall be incurred by any person for giving in good faith of
information for the purpose of sub-section(1)”. Numbering of subsequent sub-clauses may be
modified accordingly.
X. Clause 21 : Punishment for failure to report or record a case
10.1 Clause 21 incorporates the provision for mandatory reporting and reads as under:-
(1) Any person, who fails to report an offence under sub-section(1) of section 19  or section
20 or who fails to record such offence under sub-section(2) of section 19  shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description which may extend to six months or with fine or with
both.
(2) Any person, being in-charge of any company or an institution (by whatever name called)
who fails to report the commission of an offence under sub-section (1)  of section 19  in respect
of a subordinate under his control, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year and with fine.
(3) The provision of sub-section (1)  shall not apply to a child under this Act.
10.2 Strong objections were raised by the stakeholders on the mandatory aspect of reporting of
child abuse cases. The Committee was given to understand that due to social stigma, child’s emotional
attachment to the abuser etc. reporting of abuse was not preferred in a large number of cases. It was
contended that awareness on child abuse in India was lacking. Factors like social stigma, community
pressure, difficulties of navigating the Criminal justice system, total dependency on perpetrator
emotionally and economically, lack of access to support systems etc inhibited children and their
families to seek redressal within the legal system. Some of the stakeholders suggested deleting the
clause altogether.
10.3 The Committee strongly feels that given the situation prevailing at ground level, such
universal mandatory reporting cannot be considered practical. It might act as counter-productive
for the child victims themselves. For instance, if the parents choose not to report the mater
to the police for the sake of protecting the child from social stigma, they would be seriously
handicapped even to seek medical help for the victim.

23
10.4 One suggestion placed before the Committee was that mandatory reporting be limited
to certain specific persons alone like-
– Any Child Care Custodian
– Health or Medical Practitioners
– Child Protection Agency Employees such as Childline, Juvenile Justice Functionaries
– Commercial Film and Photographic Print Processors
– Any establishment employing persons below 18 years of age.
The Committee finds the above suggestion justified and, accordingly, recommends that
clause 21 (1) may be deleted and clause 21(2) may be redrafted. The Committee is also in
agreement with the proposal to add Special Police Officer and Trafficking Police Officer so as
to empower them to report for investigation of any possible commission of offence under this
Act by any person whenever a child is rescued from a brothel house and it has been proved
that such a child has been sexually violated during its stay there. The Committee accordingly,
recommends necessary modification in clause 21.
XI. Clause 22 : Punishment for false complaint or false information
11.1 Clause 22 lays down the following provision in cases of false complaints or false information:-
(1) Any person, who makes false complaint or provides false information against any person,
in respect of an offence committed on a child below the age of sixteen years, under sections
3, 5, 7  and section 9 , solely with the intention to humiliate, extort or threaten or defame him,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine
or with both.
(2) Where a false complaint has been made or false information has been provided by a child,
being less than sixteen years, no punishment shall be imposed on such child.
(3) Where a false complaint has been made or false information has been provided by a child
being more than sixteen years, and it is proved that the complaint was made or information
was provided with his own informed decision and in such case, the child shall be sent to the
Juvenile Justice Board constituted under section 4  of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection
of Children) Act, 2000, for suitable remedial action.
(4) Whoever, not being a child, makes a false complaint or provides false information against
a child, knowing it to be false, thereby victimizing such child in any of the offences under
this Act, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine or
with both.
11.2 Strong objections were raised by majority of the stakeholders on this provision. It was pointed
out that a provision for punishment for false complaint or false information would defeat the very
purpose of this law. Scope for misuse of any law cannot guide the formulation of a legislation meant
to protect the vulnerable. Not only this, fear of reprisal would routinely prevent any person from
coming forward and seeking protection against sexual abuse, thereby reinforcing the cycle of
subjugation and violence.
11.3 On being asked to clarify the basis for having such a provision, it was informed by the
Ministry that it was meant to work as a safeguard against misuse of the provision for presumption
of offence in certain cases under clause 29 of the Bill, which shifted the burden of proof on the
accused in case of the offence of sexual assault being committed on a child below 16 years of age.

24
At the same time to prevent misuse of the law, deterrence in the form of punishment has been
provided for making false complaint or providing false information with malicious intent. It was further
clarified that the punishment proposed was relatively light, keeping in mind the need to encourage
reporting of offences. Not only this, the children below 16 years of age were exempt from punishment
to instill confidence in the child victim and witnesses to come forward.
11.4 The Committee observes that the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights,
the statutory body at the national level meant to act as a watch dog for protection of child
rights is in agreement with this provision. The Committee understands that the proposed law
is meant to instill in children a sense of confidence to report abuse and exploitation instead
of deterring them from reporting. But at the same time, provision of this proposed law is not
meant for settling scores and such attempts need to be curbed. The argument that the CrPC
contains adequate provisions to deal with false complaints is also not very convincing. The
Committee has observed that all such legislations invariably have a provision which would
serve as a deterrent in case of false complaints being made. The only thing is to ensure that
such a provision is free from any unnecessary or uncalled for stipulation.
11.5 The Committee notes that clause 22(1) makes a distinction between a false complaint/false
information given by any person for an offence against a child below sixteen years and child between
sixteen to eighteen years. The Committee is of the view that such a distinction is not well-placed. Any
offence against a child below eighteen years in the proposed law is to be treated with the same gravity.
Hence, any false complaint against a person having committed such an offence against a child has to
be taken in that perspective, child being below 16 years or being between 16 and 18 years notwithstanding.
Accordingly, the words ‘below the age of 16 years’ may be deleted from clause 22(1).
11.6 Similarly, in sub-clause (2), where a false complaint has been made or false information
provided by a child, being less than 16 years, no punishment shall be imposed on such a child, should
be applicable on children below 18 years. The Committee is also of the view that sub-clause (3) needs
to be deleted as no exception on the definition of child below 18 years is justifiable. Such matters
are to be referred to the Child Welfare Committee or Juvenile Justice Board as provided under JJ Act.
Sub-clause (4) may, accordingly, be re-wounded as sub-clause (3).
XII. Clause 23 : Procedure for Media
12.1 Clause 23 lays down the procedure for media for reporting on sexual offence against a child
reads as under:-
(1) No person shall make any report or present comments on any child from any form of media
or studio or photographic facilities without having complete and authentic information, and
without the consent of the child  or his parents or guardian, who may be involved in an offence
under this Act either as an accused or as a victim, which may have the effect of lowering
his character or infringing upon his privacy.
(2) No reports in any media shall disclose, without the consent of the child or his parents or
guardian, the identity of a child including his name, address, photograph, family details,
school, neighbourhood or any other particulars which may lead to disclosure of identity of the
child.
(3) The publisher or owner of the media or studio or photographic facilities shall be jointly
and severally liable for the acts and omissions of his employee.
(4) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1)  or sub-section (2)  shall be
liable to be punished with imprisonment of either description for a period which shall not be
less than one year but which may extend to two years or with fine or with both.

25
12.2 The Committee observes that this clause lays down the conditions for reporting in media about
sexual offences against children. Such reporting is to be based on complete and authentic information
and with the consent of the child or his parents or guardian. The Child or parents or guardian may
be involved in an offence under this law either as an accused or as a victim. Identity of the child
could be disclosed in any media only with the consent of the child or his parents or guardian. The
Committee finds these conditions to be very objectionable. Firstly, the question of seeking consent of
a child victim should not arise as such an action is likely to further victimize the child victim as her/
his traumatic state of mind would get aggravated. Secondly, parents or guardian who may be accused
should not have the right to authorize giving of information in media. Similarly, as given in sub-
clause (2), disclosure of identity on the consent of child/parents/guardians is also not desirable keeping
in view the misuse/uncalled for publicity of such instances.
12.3 The Committee observes that this provision has also not found favour with NCPCR. Their
view is that it is preferable to ensure that the confidentiality provision should be mandatorily observed
and not waived at the option of child’s parents or guardian. The Committee would like to draw the
attention of the Ministry to section 21 of the JJ Act relating to prohibition of publication of name etc
of juvenile in conflict with law or child in need of care and protection involved in any proceeding
under the Act which categorically prohibits any kind of publicity by the media. The only exception
is that such permission can only be given by the authority holding the inquiry that too to  be recorded
in writing and if  such disclosure considered to  be in the interest of  the child.
12.4 The Committee is of the view that the clause 23 of this proposed law may  be modified
in accordance with section 21 of the JJ Act. Punishment prescribed under sub-clause (4) may
also be reduced accordingly.
XIII. Clause 24 : Recording of Statement of a Child and Clause 27 : Medical Examination of
a Child
13.1 Clause 24 provides that while recording statement of  a child, the provisions of section 157 of
the Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply. The clause further provides that if  the statement
of the child is being recorded under section 164 of  the CrPC, the magistrate recording such statement
shall record the statement as spoken by the child in the presence of  the parents of  the child or any
other person in whom the child has trust or confidence and wherever necessary, the magistrate may
take the assistance of  an interpreter while recording the statement of  the child and in case of  a child
having a mental or physical disability seek the assistance of  special educator or an expert in that field
to record the statement of  the child. Clause 27 provides for the medical examination of  a child in
accordance with section 164A of  the CrPC irrespective of  the fact whether or not an FIR or a
complaint has been registered for the offence. According to  the Ministry, these two clauses contain
the investigation and medical process keeping in mind the best interest of  the child and include child
friendly provisions.
13.2 The stakeholders heard by the Committee  pointed out that the objective of  the law is to  ensure
child protection and establish child friendly procedures at all stages from reporting of  an offence to
investigation, trial and rehabilitation of  the child victim. Therefore, the procedures to  be followed by
the police, courts and doctors should be spelt out clearly and distinctly. NCPCR also suggested that
clause 24(1) should contain the provisions of  section 157 CrPC with suitable modifications and it
should read:-
“in relation to an offence, the recording of statement of the victim shall be conducted at the
residence of the victim or in the place of her choice and as far as practicable by a woman
police officer in the presence of her parents or guardian or near relatives or social worker of
the locality. It further suggested that if the police official was recording the statement of a

26
child he shall state his name and designation to the child and/or support person and would
also provide a copy of the statement to the child or the support person.
13.3 Another suggestion put forth by the stakeholders was that the section should be split into two
segments providing separate procedures for recording of the statement of child by the police and the
magistrate. Notable variables suggested for inclusion in the procedure to be followed by the police
were recording of statement by a woman police officer in the case of girls and a male officer in the
case of boys, not below the rank of sub-inspector; taking assistance of social worker, counsel or
psychologist, translator and such other persons; child victim not to sign any statement, statement to
be recorded at the residence of the victim or at the place where victim can make a statement without
fear, child victim not to be kept in the police station overnight on any pretext including medical
examination, investigation officer to ensure prompt medical examination and forensic examination;
completion of investigation within 90 days and investigation to be supervised periodically.
13.4 Important variables to be included in the procedure to be followed by the magistrate were
avoiding any adjournment in recording statements, magistrate/judge to record the statement in the
hospital if the victim was in hospital, separate rooms with the court precincts for recording statement
to create child friendly environment, child victim not to be separated from his/her parents/guardians,
before handing over the child to her/his parents/guardians to ascertain their bona fide and that there
was no likelihood of the child being in any danger or harm from them, if the child expressed fears
on being handed over to his/her parents/guardians, the magistrate/judge to place the child in an
appropriate institution and pass the matter to the concerned Child Welfare Committee or District
Magistrate/Collector and where such committees did not exist to make arrangement for suitable
rehabilitation of the child, wherever possible the statement of the child victim to be video recorded
and a child not to be sent to an institution meant for adults.
13.5 Committee’s attention was also drawn to the fact that due to the lack of uniform special
education facilities across the country and the children were not always in a position to communicate
via any special educator or expert however well trained they may be. To take care of such
contigencies, it was suggested that the second proviso to clause 24(2) may include the words ‘any
person’ familiar with may reads as follows:-
“Provided further that the magistrate may in case of a child having a mental or physical
disability, seek the assistance of a special educator or any person familiar with the communication
of that child or an expert in that field, to record the statement of the child”.
The Committee observes that the Ministry has found the suggestion acceptable. The
Committee accordingly, recommends that necessary modification may be made in clause 24(2).
13.6 Similarly, regarding the medical examination of the child victim of sexual abuse, NCPCR and
other stakeholders suggested detailed protocols to be followed by the medical practitioner. They also
suggested that the State Governments should make available in every hospital a “sexual assault”
forensic evidence kit with prescribed contents and should also ensure that the hospitals are equipped
with the requisite apparatus and adequate pathological facilities for preservation of sample collected.
The stakeholders also suggested setting up of special rooms for examination and privacy of the victim,
allowing parents/guardians person trusted by the child to be present during medical examination,
recording of assault history by the attending doctors, hospitals to co-operate with the police and
preserve the samples in their pathological facilities, medical examination report to be prepared
expeditiously, a copy of which to be given to the parents/guardian of the child victim, provision for
emergence medical treatment of the child victim.
13.7 On this issue being taken up with the Ministry, it was clarified that the division of chapter VI
relating to the ‘Procedures for Recording Statement of the child’ would not serve any useful purpose
as the substantive provisions were already indicated in clause 19 relating to reporting of the offence

27
and recording of the complaint, clause 23 on non-disclosure of the identity of the child, clause 24
relating to recording the statement of the child and clauses 25, 26 and 27 of the Bill to cover
investigation and medical process to be followed in case of child victim of sexual abuse. It was
emphasized that the provisions in these clauses were child friendly and the best interests of the child
were being ensured. Regarding the medical examination protocol, Ministry’s specific reply was that
details would be provided in the rules to be framed under the Act and it was not necessary to spell
them out in the principal Act.
13.8 The Committee would like to point out that as has been seen in the cases of the sexual
abuse of women, their trials often lead to re-victimisation and ignominy, as the trial process
itself makes the victim to relive the horrific experience. And, in the case of a child, due to
her/his vulnerability it may lead to further trauma. It is also a fact that the existing
institutional mechanisms have not proved to be adequate enough to address the sexual offence
cases against both the women and children.
13.9 The Committee observes that where the accused is known to the victim or is part of
the family, their families being under great pressure sometimes turn hostile in the court. Not
only that, incest cases seldom get reported and when reported, do not proceed for too long and
fall out in the course of the trial. Situation becomes more grave when the accused is a person
in authority such as the superintendent of an institution or school principal or teacher etc.
During its interaction with various stakeholders, it was emphasized that there were inadvertent
delays in both medical examination and trials, inadequate protection for victims and witnesses
inspite of there being prescribed guidelines. The Committee’s attention has been drawn by
directions/guidelines given/laid down by High Courts in this regard. The Committee would
particularly like to make a reference to the guidelines in a child abuse case detailing the role
of police, medical examination, recording of statement before magistrate, Trial Court procedure
given by Delhi High Court in WP (Crl.) No. 930/2007. In view of such a discouraging scenario
and the acute sensitivity of the issue involved the Committee strongly feels that the detailed
procedures as given in the aforesaid Delhi High Court guidelines and those suggested by
NCPCR and other stakeholders are valuable and merit serious consideration by the Ministry
especially in the context that the proposed legislation has been brought from the perspective
of the child welfare. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that Chapter VI relating to
‘Procedures for recording statement of the child’, particularly clause 24 and 27 may be
reviewed and made more extensive in line with the suggestions made by NCPCR and High
Court guidelines.
XIV. Clause : 28 Designation of Special Courts
14.1 Clause 28 deals with special courts and provides that for the purpose of providing a speedy
trial, the State Government shall in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court and by
notification in the official Gazette, designate for each district court of session to be special court to
try the offences under the proposed legislation. In addition to the offences under the proposed
legislation, the Special Court would also try an offence with which the accused may, under the CrPC
be charged at the same trial and would further have jurisdiction to try offences under section 67 B
of the Information Technology Act, 2000 in so far it relates to publication or transmission of sexually
explicit material depicting children in any act, or conduct or manner or facilitates abuse of children
online.
14.2 Two of the stakeholders had some reservations on clause 28. It was pointed out that
establishing special courts and appointing special public prosecutors would be duplication of the
provisions in the Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 which provides for the
constitution of ‘Children’s Court’ and special public prosecutors to hear cases relating to child, thus

28
leading to overlapping with Section 25 of CPCR Act. Their argument was that wherever Special Courts
have been designated under the Act of 2005 they may also be obligated to try offences under the
proposed legislation. The NCPCR suggested that the State Governments should be obligated to provide
appropriate infrastructure, facilities and human resources for the Special Courts to ensure that the
quality of evidence given by the child is not diminished and the magistrate to exercise the powers of
a magistrate and follow procedure as provided in the CrPC, 1973. Another stakeholder advocated for
expeditious designation of a Special Court/Children’s Court in every district to fulfill the very purpose
and spirit of the Act.
14.3 Ministry’s reply to the suggestion of obligating children’s courts, set up under the Commissions
for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005, to try offences under the proposed legislation also was that
both the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 and the proposed Bill provided for
speedy trial of cases relating to offences against children. The only difference was that while the
CPCR Act gave the State, option of setting up a Special Court, the proposed Bill made it mandatory
for states to set up such Special Courts. Thus, there was no contradiction between the CPCR Act
and the proposed legislation.
14.4 The Committee also feels that there should be no multiplicity of institutions i.e.
designated courts set up to address special situations would require infrastructure, trained
manpower and other resources. The Committee suggests that wherever Special Courts have
been designated under the CPCR Act, 2005, they should try offences under the proposed Act
also. Further, wherever, such courts have not been designated uptill now, they may be set up
under the proposed Act expeditiously. Accordingly, clause 28 (1) may be amended to read as
follows:-
“provided that if a court of session is already notified as a children’s court under the CPCR
Act and/or Special Court under any other law for the time being in force, then it shall be
deemed to be a Special Court within the provisions of this Act”.
XV. Clause 33 : Procedure and Powers of Special Courts and Recording Evidence
15.1 Clause 33 provides for procedure and powers of Special Courts. It provides that a special
court may take cognizance of any offence upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitute
such offence, or upon a police report of such facts, without the accused being committed to it for
trial. Sub-clause (7) of clause 33 provides that the Special Court shall ensure that the identity of
the child is not disclosed at any time during the course of investigation or trial, except with the
consent of the child or his parents or guardian. Explanation to the sub-clause provides that the
identity of the child shall include the identity of the child’s family, school, relatives, neighbour-hood
or any other information by which the identity of the child may be revealed. Sub-clause (8) provides
that in appropriate cases, the special court may, in addition to the punishment, direct payment of
compensation to a child for any physical or mental trauma caused to him or for immediate
rehabilitation of such child.
15.2 NCPCR suggested inclusion of some special features like live-video link, use of one way
mirrors and use of screen in this clause so as to ensure child-friendly procedure for recording the
evidence of the child. Another objection raised was related to sub- clause (7). It was mentioned that
under extenuating circumstances, what would be the authority of the parents or guardian to be able
to make a decision to disclose identity of their child or ward with a full understanding of the far
reaching implications on the well being of the child and even the family. Committee’s attention was
also drawn to the Immoral Traffic Prevention Act, 1956 which prohibited the publication of the
name of a victim below the age of 18 years or the identification of the place of the offence so as
to protect the identity of the victim. Same provision was there in respect of the Juvenile Justice
Act.

29
15.3 Ministry’s response to the objection was that while harmonizing provisions of different
legislation was desirable, it was also a fact that jurisprudence was constantly evolving. At times,
drafting a new law provided an opportunity to introduce a nuanced approach to an already accepted
principle. In such cases, ensuring the right of the child to protect his identity was of paramount
importance. At the same time, the child and his family should have the option to reach out to the larger
community, whether to share the experience and spread awareness on the issue or to mobilize public
opinion on the same. Therefore, provision has been made to allow disclosure of information about the
child with the consent of the child or his parents or guardian while at the same time providing
safeguards and punishment in case of such disclosure without consent. The Committee, however,
feels that the objections of the stakeholder are valid and the sub-clause needs to be reviewed
and modified as indicated in the recommendation with respect to clause 23.
15.4 Some objections were also raised with regard to sub-clause (8) of the clause. It was pointed
out that the general philosophy underlying victims’ compensation is expressed in the Preamble to the
Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power adopted by the
United Nations General Assembly in 1985. The Declaration includes basic principles of restitution, that
offenders should pay for the costs of their crimes-and state compensation where such costs are not
recoverable from offenders or elsewhere, states should endeavour to provide financial compensation
to such victims and their families. However, Section 33(8) of the Bill gave no clarity with regard to
compensation as it was not mentioned if the compensation was to be paid by the perpetrator or by
the State. It was important that the State compensated the victims of sexual offence as they were
entitled to compensation for the mental, emotional and physical suffering they have endured as they
alternatively, as given in section 22 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, the
Court could direct the perpetrator to pay compensation and damages for the injuries such as mental,
emotional and physical anguish undergone by the victim.
15.5 Clarification given by the Ministry was that this sub-clause should be left to the judgment of
the courts to decide where it was appropriate to award compensation to the child. It may also be left
to the court to decide the manner and quantum of the compensation to be paid as per available
provisions in law or government schemes/programmes whether of the Centre or the State including
a part of the penalty imposed on the accused to be paid as compensation. It was also mentioned that
a considered view has been taken in consultation with the Ministries of Home Affairs and Law to leave
the quantum of fine to the discretion of the court so as to address different situations as has been
the case in IPC in respect of serious offences.
15.6 The Committee feels that the principle of leaving the discretion to the Special Courts
to decide about the compensation may be done away with in respect of child victims. It would
be in the spirit of the legislation to award compensation in each case, a part of which may
come from the accused. The mechanism for having such a facility may be worked out in
consultation with State Governments and other stakeholders. Another alternative system which
can be looked into is to set up a Fund under State Government/Special Court with initial
contribution from the State Government and amount of penalty as and when imposed on the
accused which can provide relief to the victims.
XVI. Clause 43 : Power to make rules
16.1 Most of the stakeholders opined that the rule-making clause should indicate specific areas
where rules were required to be framed. As many agencies/authorities would be engaged in the
procedural/implementation aspects of the proposed legislation such as the police, medical, professionals,
social workers, prosecutors, defense lawyers, judiciary, media etc, it would have been appropriate if
specified areas were spelt out in the rule-framing clause itself. This is the well-established norm for
all legislations being formulated.

30
16.2 Ministry’s clarification on the issue was that the Central Government would be framing rules
for better implementation and administration of the provisions of the Act. The Central Government
may elaborate on the provisions for care and protection of child victims and witnesses to give effect
to their implementation, such as but not limited to, procedures for reporting of an offence,
procedures for recording statement of child, conduct of medical examination of a child, assistance
of a special educator or an expert for the assistance of a child with mental or physical disability,
assistance of an interpreter while recording the evidence of the child, presence of family member/
guardian to assist the child at various stages of the judicial process, provision of compensation and
its disbursal.
16.3 The Committee, is of the view that there should be no problem in laying down the
specifications for rule framing or listing of areas where rules may be framed. This is the
normal practice so far as rule making provisions of legislations are concerned. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that clause 43 may be modified accordingly.
XVII. Clauses 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14 & 15 relating to punishments and fines for various offences
committed under the Act
17.1 Clauses 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14 & 15 provide for punishments and fines for various sexual
offences against children.
17.2 Two very valuable suggestions were put forth by the stakeholders on these clauses, one was
for specifying a minimum amount of fine in each clause, which the Special Court on its discretion
may extend corresponding to the gravity of the offence committed against the child and the other was
that, in appropriate cases, the Special Court shall grant full or some portion of the fine amount as
compensation to the victim.
17.3 Ministry’s clarification on the issue was that a considered view has been taken in consultation
with the Ministries of Home Affairs and Law to leave the quantum of fine to the discretion of the
Special Court so as to address different situations as has been the case in IPC in respect of serious
offences. Further the issue of compensation was addressed in clause 33 (8).
17.4 The Committee agrees with the Ministry’s stand that the total quantum of fine to be
imposed in each case should be left to the discretion of the courts. However, it also finds merit
in the suggestion that minimum amount of fine may be specified in each of the punishment
clauses. Above this minimum fine, it should be left to the court to fix total quantum of fine
according to the gravity of offence.
XVIII. Conclusion
18.1 The Committee believes that a legislation for the protection of children against
sexual offences though not a complete remedy for the malady is a much needed one for
ensuring a secure and carefree future for them. Sexual harassment of children, the most
vulnerable segment of our society is a sad reality at present. It is an index of moral
degradation of society in recent years. Although it is high time for such a law to come into
effect, a legislation has its own limitations also. It entails the provision of a redressal
mechanism for cases of sexual offences but cannot change the moral fabric of the society.
It is where the need for high moral standards and element of protection for children,
future of the country which has been the cherished goal of our social fabric is felt. The
Committee would like to emphasize on the importance of inculcating such values in a child
at tender age itself so that affection and love for children are imbibed and ingrained at
the threshold itself.

31
19. The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any amendments.
20. The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
21. The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the amendments/
additions suggested by it. The Committee would also appreciate if the revised provisions as recommended
by it are made available to it before the Bill is again brought before the Parliament.
22. The Committee would like the Department to submit a note with reasons on the recommendations/
suggestions which could not be incorporated in the Bill.

32
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
I. INTRODUCTION
The Committee, while taking note of the fact that there is no law to deal comprehensively
with sexual offences against children and in a way of discharging an obligation to the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of Children which India has ratified, welcomes the initiative
of the Ministry in drafting a special law to deal with such offences against children proposing
to evolve child-friendly procedures for investigation and handling of child-abuse cases. The
Committee understands that sexual offence of any kind not only harms the child physically
but also causes long term damage to the mental state of the child. Therefore, in addition to
providing for effective mechanism for handling child-related sexual offences through the
proposed legislation, there is an urgent need for initiating some preventive measures so as to
ensure that chances of sexual exploitation of children remain minimum. Along with preventive
and protective safeguards, aspect of relief and rehabilitation of these most vulnerable victims
will also have to be looked into. The Committee is of the firm view that objective of the
proposed legislation will remain unfulfilled if both the preventive and rehabilitative aspects
remain sidelined. These issues need to be addressed within the Bill to the extent possible and
through other mechanisms. (Para 1.14)
CONSULTATION PROCESS
The Committee observes that the Ministry has held an extensive consultation exercise
since 2005 with a large number of stakeholders, concerned Ministries, the National Commission
for Protection of Child Rights, a statutory body having the mandate of protection of child
rights and organizations actively working for the cause of children. The Committee, however,
observes that there were a number of issues raised by many stakeholders before the Ministry
which required its consideration. During its deliberations, these suggestions/apprehensions were
again emphasized with conviction and collaborated by facts. The proposed legislation which is
the final outcome of such a prolonged exercise undertaken with involvement of all concerned
is indeed a welcome step. (Para 2.5)
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has undertaken wide ranging
consultation with NCPCR and various other stakeholders while drafting this legislation. It was
a good initiative to have a separate law to deal with sexual offences against children than
making amendments in the IPC. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the National
Commission for Protection of Child Rights in providing the alternative draft. The Committee
observes that although the Ministry has kept the draft Bill of NCPCR as the basis of this
legislation, many of the recommendations have not been incorporated in it. (Para 2.9)
Committee’s deliberations with some organizations actively engaged in the child welfare
activities at the ground level for considerable period of time proved very fruitful. Their
experience and expertise of jurisprudence from the perspective of child victims vis-à-vis adult
victims gave a valuable insight to the Committee to understand the genesis of the proposed
legislation, implications of its various provisions, problem-areas in its implementation and the
aspects remaining uncovered. (Para 2.10)
32

33
IMPORTANT ISSUES/CONCERNS RAISED
Rehabilitation, Compensation, Counselling and Support Services for the Victims
The Committee strongly feels that protection of children from sexual offences has to
be seen in a wider perspective. Confining it to confirmation of a sexual offence against a child
followed by levying of punishment through special courts is simply ignoring the real welfare
of a child victim who may be in deep trauma with no family support and thus fully exposed
to further abuse. Every attempt both at individual level and society level has to be made for
enabling a child victim to become again a happy normal child. To achieve this objective, a fully
functional and effective institutional mechanism has to be put in place and that can only done
through making statutory provisions, formulating rules and guidelines. The Committee observes
that the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 is meant for all the
children who require care and protection due to their placement in certain situations as
specified in the said Act. The JJ Act has detailed provisions for relief and rehabilitation of such
children. Under the Act state governments are required to set up Child Welfare Committees,
which are empowered to dispose of cases for care, protection, treatment, development and
rehabilitation of children and provide for their basic needs and protection of human rights.
There is also provision for children’s homes, shelter homes and also a provision for rehabilitation
and social reintegration. (Para 3.4)
The Committee was given to understand that the Juvenile Justice Law needs to be
strengthened or otherwise adequate provisions may be built into the proposed law referring to
the Juvenile Justice Law. The role of the District Child Protection Societies, Special Juvenile
Police Units, Child Welfare Committees, Welfare Officers and Probation Officers provided for
in the Juvenile Justice Law is critical in ensuring speedy recovery, social reintegration and
rehabilitation of child victims. Feedback made available to the Committee clearly indicates that
these institutional mechanisms under the Juvenile Justice Law are yet to be established in
many states and wherever established cannot be considered to be performing their mandated
task. The Committee would appreciate if an assessment of all such functionaries is made to
so as to have the real picture of the ground realities. Inputs provided to the Committee in
this regard can be easily acted upon in coordination with NCPCR and other stakeholders.
(Para 3.5)
Training of functionaries dealing with Child victims at different levels
The Committee appreciates the variety of mechanisms available for training of different
categories of functionaries. The Committee would, however, like to emphasize that it would be
appropriate to make an assessment of all the training programmes being conducted by
different agencies so as to ensure that benefits of such programmes are availed by all
concerned. Co-ordination and monitoring by the Ministry in this vital area will make the
difference. (Para 3.9)
Monitoring Mechanism
The Committee understands that on Juvenile Justice, the Supreme Court had decided
to designate a High Court Judge or a Committee of High Court Judges in every state to
monitor the implementation of the Juvenile Justice Act. Wherever such Committees exist,
there has been a great improvement. The Committee feels that a similar mechanism for this
Bill will also be required. Perhaps the mandate of Juvenile Justice Committees of High Courts
can be extended with suitable adaption to cover matters of sexual offences against children
also. The Committee strongly feels that an effective and functional/monitoring mechanism will

34
have to be evolved for the proposed law. The Committee would appreciate if the Ministry
initiates action for having a monitoring mechanism in advance. (Para 3.11)
Public awareness about the Act
In view of the proposed legislation being a special criminal and social law, the Committee
is of the view that society as a whole and all concerned envisaged for its implementation and
also the children to the extent possible will have to be made aware about its mandate and
outreach. The Committee will like to draw the attention of the Ministry to the following steps
which can be taken:
– easy to understand materials in regional languages on the law need to be developed
– Workshops specially seminars for implementing agencies can be organized.
– Both children as well as their parents/guardians to be sensitized about the subject
of sexual offences against children and the law with the objective of empowering
them about their rights and duties.
(Para 3.12)
The Committee is also of the view that as in the Protection of Women from Domestic
Violence Act, 2005, a provision may be incorporated in the Bill which would place an obligation
on Central and State Governments to spread awareness through different means and mechanism.
(Para 3.13)
Role of NCPCR/SCPCR
NCPCR may be rightfully considered for a monitoring role under this Bill as envisaged
to it under section 31 of the RTE Act, 2009. The NCPCR could widely publicize the provisions
of the Bill and could get appropriate training and orientation programmes organized for
concerned stakeholders. It may also undertake a periodic evaluation study of the implementation
of the proposed legislation and recommend corrective measures to fill in the gaps in its
implementation. Similar role could be envisaged for SCPCRs also. Details for periodic monitoring
and Details for periodic monitoring and evaluation mechanism could be provided in the Rules
to be framed under the Act. (Para 3.13)
The Committee makes the following observations/recommendations on some provisions of the
Bill:
Clause 2 : Definitions
The Committee observes that the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of children)
Act, 2000 also defines the juvenile or child as a person who has not completed eighteen years
of age. This definition is not qualified by the words “save as otherwise provided”. On the same
analogy, the Committee also feels that the words “save as otherwise provided” be removed
from the provision to avoid any misunderstanding. (Para 5.4)
The Committee feels that the definition of the term “shared household” in the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 pertains to ownership, right, title,
interest and equity of the household by the aggrieved person or the respondent or both. The
purpose of the definition of “shared household” in the proposed legislation is vastly different
from that of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that the definition may be amended with the Bill. (Para 5.7)

35
The Committee observes that it is a fact that creation of multiple courts/legal
infrastructures will serve no useful purpose. Wherever, the legal framework has been created
under the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 the same should be used for
the purposes of the proposed law. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that a proviso to
clause 28(1) may be added. (Para 5.10)
Clause 7 : Sexual Assault
The Committee is of the view that sexual offences as defined in clauses 3 and 7 cover
all the likely situations to be covered thereunder. The Committee would like to point out
that Indian culture and our society even today, inspite of great advancement and global
connectivity leading to exposure to western culture, retain their special identity which cannot
be as open as the western world so far as the subject of the proposed legislation is
concerned. (Para 6.3)
Regarding sexual offences as defined in the Bill indicated a male bias, ignoring the
fact that even a boy could be a victim, the Committee notes that as per the General Clauses
Act, 1897 in all Central Acts and Regulations, unless there is any thing repugnant in the
subject or context, words importing the masculine gender shall be taken to include females.
(Para 6.4)
The Committee is of the view that once the age of child has been specified as 18 years,
the element of consent should be treated as irrelevant up to this age. Therefore, the provisos
to clauses 3 and 7 of the Bill should be deleted to protect the rights of child and for the sake
of protecting children against abuse. This would also be in consonance with the country’s
commitment towards UNCRC and the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000. (Para 6.8)
The Committee has also a word of caution. By having the element of consent, the focus
would be on the victim which would invariably lead to revictimisation of the victim in the
hands of the justice delivery process and would be especially problematic when dealing with
children. The Committee would like to point out that a great deal of jurisprudence supports
the theory that law should move away from this classical approach of trials in such cases and
focus on the conduct of the accused and the circumstances surrounding the offence rather than
the conduct of the victim thereby obviating the necessity of lengthy cross-examination of the
victim on the issue of consent. (Para 6.9)
Clause 5 : Aggravated Penetrative Sexual Assault and clause 9: Aggravated Sexual Assault
The Committee feels physical and mental incapacity are two different issues and
usually mental trauma is not indicated through obvious manifestations but is understood
through various behavioural and emotional indicators and to assess the mental incapacity
trained professionals are required. Therefore, the Committee suggests that the clauses 5(j) and
9(j) may be reworded as “Physically incapacitates the child or causes the child to become
mentally ill as defined under the Mental Health Act, 1987 or causes impairment so as to
render the child unfit to perform regular tasks, temporarily or permanently.” (Para 7.16)
The Committee also feels that some provision protecting the interests of Children
belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes should be added to the clause. The
Committee’s recommendation is based on the premise that SCs/STs are still marginalized
groups in the society and there are cultural and social practices that make them more
vulnerable to sectarian violence. Accordingly change may be effected in clause 5(s) and 9(s).
(Para 7.19)

36
Clause : 16 Abetment of an offence
The Committee feels that the serious problem involving many complexities has to be
dealt with by the use of effective legislative provisions with an in built monitoring mechanism
and required implementing agencies in place. (Para 8.6)
The Committee is of the view that with increasing trend of child trafficking cases and
no exclusive legal mechanism therefore, there is a need for taking some initiative in this
direction. It is true that child trafficking cases may not always relate to sexual exploitation,
but whenever there is such an instance, it has to be curbed effectively for which legal support
is essential. The proposed legislation deals with all kinds of sexual assaults and harassments
mainly on individual basis. However, in child trafficking cases, the perpetrator may not be
directly considered an offender. This category of sexual exploitation of child victims has also
to be addressed. The Committee would also like to point that since India has ratified the
Convention on Transitional Organized Crimes and its Optional Protocol on trafficking in
human beings, it becomes even more necessary to define ‘child trafficking for sexual purposes’
in the proposed legislation. (Para 8.7)
Clause 19 : Reporting of offences
The Committee is not aware whether any assessment about the functioning of SJPUs
has been made either by the Ministry or any independent agency so far. If not, it is high time
that such a study is got conducted so as to know whether such units have been set up in each
district and wherever set up about their functional status. It is all the more required in view
of the fact that mandate of SJPUs is going to be expanded under the proposed legislation. The
Committee would also like to point out that the Child Welfare Committees set up in each
district of the country under section 29 of the JJ Act are the final authority to dispose of cases
for the care, protection, treatment, development and rehabilitation of children as well as to
provide for their basic needs and protection of human rights. To say that these Committees
will also have to report complaints of sexual offence to SJPUs or the local police does not seem
to be the right argument. The Committee would like to point out that under section 32 of the
JJ Act, besides any public servant, childline social worker, any child in need of care and
protection may be produced before the Child Welfare Committee by any police officer or SJPU
or designated police officer. Therefore, it would be in the fitness of things if the Child Welfare
Committees like SJPUs or local police also become the designated authority to receive
complaint from the child and report the matter to the Special Court after completing all the
procedural formalities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Child Welfare Committee
may also be included under clause 19(1). (Para 9.6)
So far as reporting by general public is concerned, the Committee feels that general
public should be encouraged to report and reporting in good faith must not invite civil or
criminal liability. The Committee, accordingly, suggests that clause 19(2) may be re-worded as
“No liability civil or criminal shall be incurred by any person for giving in good faith of
information for the purpose of sub-section(1)”. Numbering of subsequent sub-clauses may be
modified accordingly. (Para 9.8)
Clause 21 : Punishment for failure to report or record a case.
The Committee strongly feels that given the situation prevailing at ground level, such
universal mandatory reporting cannot be considered practical. It might act as counter-productive
for the child victims themselves. For instance, if the parents choose not to report the mater
to the police for the sake of protecting the child from social stigma, they would be seriously
handicapped even to seek medical help for the victim. (Para 10.3)

37
Clause 22 : Punishment for false complaint or false information
The Committee observes that the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights,
the statutory body at the national level meant to act as a watch dog for protection of child
rights is in agreement with this provision. The Committee understands that the proposed law
is meant to instill in children a sense of confidence to report abuse and exploitation instead
of deterring them from reporting. But at the same time, provision of this proposed law is not
meant for settling scores and such attempts need to be curbed. The argument that the CrPC
contains adequate provisions to deal with false complaints is also not very convincing. The
Committee has observed that all such legislations invariably have a provision which would
serve as a deterrent in case of false complaints being made. The only thing is to ensure that
such a provision is free from any unnecessary or uncalled for stipulation. (Para 11.4)
Clause 23 : Procedure for Media
The Committee is of the view that the clause 23 of this proposed law may be modified
in accordance with section 21 of the JJ Act. Punishment prescribed under sub-clause (4) may
also be reduced accordingly. (Para 12.4)
Clause 24 : Recording of Statement of a Child and Clause 27: Medical Examination of a Child
The Committee would like to point out that as has been seen in the cases of the sexual
abuse of women, their trials often lead to re-victimisation and ignominy, as the trial process
itself makes the victim to relive the horrific experience. And, in the case of a child, due to
her/his vulnerability it may lead to further trauma. It is also a fact that the existing
institutional mechanisms have not proved to be adequate enough to address the sexual offence
cases against both the women and children. (Para 13.8)
The Committee observes that where the accused is known to the victim or is part of
the family, their families being under great pressure sometimes turn hostile in the court. Not
only that, incest cases seldom get reported and when reported, do not proceed for too long and
fall out in the course of the trial. Situation becomes more grave when the accused is a person
in authority such as the superintendent of an institution or school principal or teacher etc.
During its interaction with various stakeholders, it was emphasized that there were inadvertent
delays in both medical examination and trials, inadequate protection for victims and witnesses
inspite of there being prescribed guidelines. Committee’s attention has been drawn by directions/
guidelines given/laid down by High Courts in this regard. The Committee would particularly
like to make a reference to the guidelines in a child abuse case detailing the role of police,
medical examination, recording of statement before magistrate, Trial Court procedure given by
Delhi High Court in WP (Crl.) No. 930/2007. In view of such a discouraging scenario and the
acute sensitivity of the issue involved the Committee strongly feels that the detailed procedures
as given in the aforesaid Delhi High Court guidelines and those suggested by NCPCR and
other stakeholders are valuable and merit serious consideration by the Ministry especially in
the context that the proposed legislation has been brought from the perspective of the child
welfare. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that Chapter VI relating to ‘Procedures for
recording statement of the child’, particularly clause 24 and 27 may be reviewed and made
more extensive in line with the suggestions made by NCPCR and High Court guidelines.
(Para 13.9)
Clause : 28 Designation of Special Courts
The Committee also feels that there should be no multiplicity of institutions i.e.
designated courts set up to address special situations would require infrastructure, trained

38
manpower and other resources. The Committee suggests that wherever Special Courts have
been designated under the CPCR Act, 2005, they should try offences under the proposed Act
also. Further, wherever, such courts have not been designated uptill now, they may be set up
under the proposed Act expeditiously. (Para 14.4)
Clause 33 : Procedure and Powers of Special Courts and Recording Evidence
The Committee feels that the principle of leaving the discretion to the Special Courts
to decide about the compensation may be done away with in respect of child victims. It would
be in the spirit of the legislation to award compensation in each case, a part of which may
come from the accused. The mechanism for having such a facility may be worked out in
consultation with State Governments and other stakeholders. Another alternative system which
can be looked into is to set up a Fund under State Government/Special Court with initial
contribution from the State Government and amount of penalty as and when imposed on the
accused which can provide relief to the victims. (Para 15.6)
Clause 43 : Power to make rules
The Committee, is of the view that there should be no problem in laying down the
specifications for rule framing or listing of areas where rules may be framed. This is the
normal practice so far as rulemaking provisions of legislations are concerned. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that clause 43 may be modified accordingly. (Para 16.3)
Clauses 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14 & 15 relating to punishments and fines for various offences
committed under the Act.
The Committee agrees with the Ministry’s stand that the total quantum of fine to be
imposed in each case should be left to the discretion of the courts. However, it also finds merit
in the suggestion that minimum amount of fine may be specified in each of the punishment
clauses. Above this minimum fine, it should be left to the court to fix total quantum of fine
according to the gravity of offence. (Para 17.4)
Conclusion
The Committee believes that a legislation for the protection of children against sexual
offences though not a complete remedy for the malady is a much needed one for ensuring a
secure and carefree future for them. Sexual harassment of children, the most vulnerable
segment of our society is a sad reality at present. It is an index of moral degradation of society
in recent years. Although it is high time for such a law to come into effect, a legislation has
its own limitations also. It entails the provision of a redressal mechanism for cases of sexual
offences but cannot change the moral fabric of the society. It is where the need for high moral
standards and element of protection for children, future of the country which has been the
cherished goal of our social fabric is felt. The Committee would like to emphasize on the
importance of inculcating such values in a child at tender age itself so that affection and love
for children are imbibed and ingrained at the threshold itself. (Para 18.1)

39
MINUTES

XXXII
THIRTY SECOND MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 18 th
August, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Kirti Azad – in the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Oscar Fernandes
3. Shri Prakash Javadekar
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri Pramod Kureel
6. Shri Janardhan Waghmare
7. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
8. Shri P.K. Biju
9. Shri Jeetendersingh Bundela
10. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
11. Shri P.C. Gaaddigoudar
12. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
13. Shri Tapas Paul
14. Shri Ashok Tanwar
15. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
41

42
LIST OF WITNESSES
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES BILL, 2011
II. MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
(i) Shri D.K. Sikri, Secretary
(ii) Dr. V ivek Joshi, Joint Secretary
(iii) Shrimati Anju Bhalla, Director
(iv) Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
(v) Shri Radhey Shyam, Under Secretary
2. The Chairman requested Shri Kirti Azad, M.P. Lok Sabha to preside over the meeting of the
Committee. The Chairman then welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee convened
to hear***     *** Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development Bill, 2011 on the Protection
of Children from Sexual Offences Bill, 2011. ***      ***.
3. * * *
(The witnesses then withdrew)
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child
Development on the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Bill, 2011. Members raised some
queries which were replied to by the witnesses. The Committee decided to forward a questionnarie
on the Bill to the Ministry for their written comments.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
4. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

43
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the
30th September, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri N.K. Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
7. Shri Mirza Mehboob Beg
8. Shri Sameer Bhujbal
9. Shri P.K. Biju
10. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
11. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
12. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
13. Shri Rahul Gandhi
14. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
15. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
16. Shri Balakrishna Khanderao Shukla
17. Shri Ashok Tanwar
18. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 'Vinnu'
19. Shri P. Viswanathan
20. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
43

44
LIST OF WITNESSES
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES BILL, 2011
I. NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR PROTECTION OF CHILD RIGHTS (NCPCR)
(i) Prof. Shantha Sinha, Chairperson
(ii) Shri Vinod Kumar Tikoo, Member
(iii) Ms. Dipa Dixit, Member
(iv) Prof. Babu Mathew, F aculty at National Law University (NLU)
(v) Ms. Vrinda Grover, Advocate
(vi) Shri B.K. Sahu, Registrar
(vii) T.K. Sorin, Protocol Officer
II. HAQ CENTRE FOR CHILD RIGHTS, NEW DELHI
Ms. Bharti Ali, Co-Director
III. INDIA ALLIANCE FOR CHILD RIGHTS, NEW DELHI
Ms. Vijaya Lakshmi Arora, Member of National Convening Group
IV. CENTRE FOR THE PREVENTION AND HEALING OF CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE,
CHENNAI
Ms. Vidya Reddy, Chairperson
V . INDIAN COUNCIL FOR CHILD WELFARE, CHENNAI
Ms Chandra Thanikachalam, Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the Chairperson, the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights and
some other organizations/associations on the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
Bill, 2011.
3. The Committee first heard the views of the Chairperson and other representatives of the
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights on the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Bill, 2011. Members raised a number of queries, some of which were replied to. The
Committee decided to send a detailed questionnaire to the National Commission for Protection of
Child Rights for written response.
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the representatives of India Alliance for Child
Rights and HAQ Centre for Child Rights, both Delhi based organizations and Centre for the
Protection and Healing of Child Sexual Abuse and the Indian Council of Child Welfare, both Chennai
based organizations, on the same Bill. Members raised certain queries which were replied to. The
Committee decided to send detailed questionnaires to these organizations for their written
submissions.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.35 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

45
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the
13th October, 2011 in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri Pramod Kureel
LOK SABHA
6. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
7. Shri Kuvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
8. Shri Sameer Bhujbal
9. Shri P.K. Biju
10. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
11. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
12. Shri Kapil Muni Karwaria
13. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
14. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
15. Kumari Saroj Pandey
16. Shri Prasanna Kumar Patasani
17. Shri Ashok Tanwar
18. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
19. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
45

46
LIST OF WITNESSES
II. THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES BILL, 2011
6. PRAYAS
(i) Shri Amod Kanth, General Secretary
(ii) Shri Shashank Shekhar, Legal Advisor
(iii) Ms. Natasha Chaudhary, Coordinator
7. MARG
(i) Ms. Anju Talukdar, Executive Director
8. DON BOSCO NATIONAL FORUM FOR THE YOUNG AT RISK
(i) Fr. Mathew Thomas, Executive Director
(ii) Shri John Tharakan, Legal Advisor and Child Protection Expert
9. SOS CHILDREN'S VILLAGES OF INDIA
(i) Shri Rakesh Jinsi, Secretary General
(ii) Dr. Archina Dhar, Director Programmes
10. SA VE THE CHILDREN
(i) Shri Mohammad Aftab, National Manager Child Protection
(ii) Shri Sanjeev Rai, National Manager Protection Expert
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear a number of stakeholders on ***    ***   the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Bill, 2011. The Chairman informed the members that deadline for presenting the Reports
on these two Bills is 31
st October, 2011. It was deemed appropriate to have a final meeting with
the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development on all the concerns expressed by the
various stakeholders on both the Bills. *** *** ***
3. * * *
4. * * *
(The witnesses then withdrew).
5. The Committee re-assembled after lunch to hear the views of the representatives of Non-
Governmental Organizations like PRAYAS, MARG, DON BOSCO, National Forum for the Young at
Risk, SOS, Children’s Villages of India, and Save the Children on the Protection of Children from
Sexual Offences Bill, 2011. The Chairman and other members raised some queries which were
replied to by the witnesses. The Committee decided to forward a questionnaire to each of these
organizations for their comments.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

47
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.30 A.M. on Thursday, the
8th December, 2011 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
3. Shri M. Rama Jois
4. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Kuvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
6. Shri Mirza Mehboob Beg
7. Shri P.K. Biju
8. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
9. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
10. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
11. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
12. Shri Balkrishna Khanderao Shukla
13. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
14. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hold clause-by-clause consideration on the Protection of Children against Sexual
Offences Bill, 2011. The Chairman requested the members to give their suggestions.
3. The Committee, then, took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Protection of Children
against Sexual Offences Bill, 2011. It examined various clauses of the Bill in the light of the
47

48
suggestions received from a large number of stakeholders. Some of the members gave valuable
suggestions on some provisions of the Bill. The Chairman directed the Secretariat to take note of
the suggestions and prepare a draft Report on the Bill for the consideration and adoption by the
Committee in its next meeting scheduled for the 19
th December, 2011.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. to meet again on the 19 th December, 2011.

49
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday the
19th December, 2011 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
3. Shri M. Rama Jois
4. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
5. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg
7. Shri Sameer Bhujbal
8. Shri P.K. Biju
9. Shri Jeetendra Singh Byndela
10. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
11. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
12. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
13. Shri Prasanna Kumar Patsani
14. Shri Balkrishna Khanderao Shukla
15. Shri Joseph Toppo
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to consider and adopt the draft 240
th Report on the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Bill, 2011. *** ***
49
*** Relates to other matter.

50
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft 240 th Report on the Protection of Children
from Sexual Offences Bill, 2011 and adopted the same with minor changes. The Committee also
decided to present the Report in both the Houses of Parliament on the 21
st December, 2011. The
Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence Dr. Janardhan Waghmare to present the
Report in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg and in his absence Shri Suresh
Chanabasappa Angadi to lay the Report in the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M.

51
ANNEXURES

53
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
Bill No. XIV  of 201 1
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES
BILL, 2011
ARRANGEMENTS OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
SEXUAL OFFENCES  AGAINST  CHILDREN
A.—PENETRATIVE  SEXUAL  ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT  THEREFOR
3. Penetrative sexual assault.
4. Punishment for penetrative sexual assault.
B.—AGGRA V ATED PENETRATIVE  SEXUAL  ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT  THEREFOR
5. Aggravated penetrative sexual assault.
6. Punishment for aggravated penetrative sexual assault.
C.—S
EXUAL  ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT  THEREFOR
7. Sexual assault.
8. Punishment for sexual assault.
D.—A
GGRAV ATED SEXUAL  ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT  THEREFOR
9. Aggravated sexual assault.
10. Punishment for aggravated sexual assault.
E.—SEXUAL  HARASSMENT  AND PUNISHMENT  THEREFOR
11. Sexual harassment.
12. Punishment for sexual harassment.

54
CHAPTER III
USING CHILD  FOR PORNOGRAPHIC  PURPOSES  AND PUNISHMENT  THEREFOR
13. Use of child for pornographic purposes.
14. Punishment for using child for pornographic purposes.
15. Punishment for storage of pornographic material involving child.
CHAPTER IV
A
BETMENT  OF AND ATTEMPT TO COMMIT  AN OFFENCE
16. Abetment of an offence.
17. Punishment for abetment.
18. Punishment for attempt to commit an offence.
CHAPTER V
P
ROCEDURE  FOR REPORTING  OF CASES
CLAUSES
19. Reporting of offences.
20. Obligation of media, studio and photographic facilities to report cases.
21. Punishment for failure to report or record a case.
22. Punishment for false complaint or false information.
23. Procedure for media.
CHAPTER VI
P
ROCEDURES  FOR RECORDING  STA TEMENT OF THE CHILD
24. Recording of statement of a child.
25. Police officer not to be in uniform.
26. Accused not to be in contact.
27. Medical examination of a child.
CHAPTER VII
S
PECIAL  C OURTS
28. Designation of Special Courts.
29. Presumption as to certain offences.
30. Presumption of culpable mental state.
31. Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to proceedings before a Special
Court.
32. Special Public Prosecutors.

55
CHAPTER VIII
PROCEDURE  AND POWERS  OF SPECIAL  COURTS AND RECORDING  EVIDENCE
33. Procedure and powers of Special Court.
34. Procedure in case of commission of offence by child and determination of age by
Special Court.
35. Period for recording of evidence of child and disposal of case.
36. Child not to see accused at the time of testifying.
37. Trials to be conducted in camera .
38. Assistance of an interpreter or expert while recording evidence of child.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
39. Guidelines for child to take assistance of experts, etc.
40. Right of child to take assistance of legal practitioner.
41. Provisions of sections 3 to 13 not to apply in certain cases.
42. Alternative punishment.
43. Power to make rules.
44. Power to remove difficulties.
THE SCHEDULE

57
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
Bill No. XIV  of 201 1
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES
BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to protect children from offences of sexual assault, sexual harassment and
pornography and provide for establishment of Special Courts for
trial of such offences and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS clause (3) of article 15 of the Constitution, inter alia ,
empowers the State to make special provisions for children;
AND WHEREAS , the Government of India has acceded on the
11th December, 1992 to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations, which has
prescribed a set of standards to be followed by all State parties in securing
the best interests of the child;
A
ND WHEREAS it is necessary for the proper development of the
child that his or her right to privacy and confidentiality be protected and
respected by every person by all means and through all stages of a judicial
process involving the child;
A
ND WHEREAS it is imperative that the law operates in a manner that
the best interest and well being of the child are regarded as being of
paramount importance at every stage, to ensure the healthy physical,
emotional, intellectual and social development of the child;
A
ND WHEREAS the State Parties to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child are required to undertake all appropriate national, bilateral and
multilateral measures to prevent—
(a) the inducement or coercion of a child to engage in any
unlawful sexual activity;
(b) the exploitative use of children in prostitution or other
unlawful sexual practices;
(c) the exploitative use of children in pornographic
performances and materials;

58
AND WHEREAS sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of children
are heinous crimes and need to be effectively addressed.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Protection of Children from
Sexual Offences Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of
Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. ( 1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.
(a) “aggravated sexual assault” has the same meaning
as assigned to it in section 9;
(b) “aggravated penetrative sexual assault” has the same
meaning as assigned to it in section 5;
(c) “armed forces or security forces” means armed
forces of the Union or security forces or police forces, as
specified in the Schedule;
(d) “child” means any person below the age of eighteen
years save as provided otherwise;
(e) “domestic relationship” shall have the same meaning
as assigned to it in clause ( f) of section 2 of the Protection
of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005;
(f) “penetrative sexual assault” has the same meaning as
assigned to it in section 3;
(g) “sexual assault” has the same meaning as assigned
to it in section 7;
(h) “sexual harassment” has the same meaning as
assigned to it in section 11;
(i) “shared household” means a household where the
person charged with the offence lives in a domestic
relationship with the parent of the child and the child;
(j) “Special Court” means a court designated as such
under section 28;
(k) “Special Public Prosecutor means a Public Prosecutor
appointed under Section 32;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
43 of 2005.

59
(2) The words and expressions used herein and not defined but
defined in the Indian Penal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000
and the Information Technology Act, 2000 shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in the said Codes or the Acts.
CHAPTER II
S
EXUAL OFFENCES  AGAINST  CHILDREN
A.—PENETRATIVE SEXUAL  ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT  THEREFORE
3. A person is said to commit “penetrative sexual assault” if
(a) he penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the
vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of a child or makes the child
to do so with him or any other person; or
(b) he inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the
body, not being the penis, into the vagina, the urethra or anus
of the child or makes the child to do so with him or any
other person; or
(c) he manipulates any part of the body of the child so
as to cause penetration into the vagina, urethra, anus or any
part of body of the child or makes the child to do so with
him or any other person; or
(d) he applies his mouth to the penis, vagina, anus,
urethra of the child or makes the child to do so to such
person or any other person:
Provided that where such penetrative sexual assault is
committed against a child between sixteen to eighteen years of age,
it shall be considered whether the consent for such an act has been
obtained against the will of the child or the consent has been
obtained by use of violence, force, threat to use force, intoxicants,
drugs, impersonation, fraud, deceit, coercion, undue influence,
threats, when the child is sleeping or unconscious or where the
child does not have the capacity to understand the nature of the act
or to resist it.
Explanation I .—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “consent” means the unequivocal voluntary agreement
where the person has by words, gestures, or any form of non-
verbal communication, communicated willingness to participate in
the act referred to in this section;
(b) “unequivocal voluntary agreement” means willingness
given for specific and be limited to the express act consented to
under this section.
Explanation II .—A child, who does not offer actual physical
resistance to penetrative sexual assault is not by reason only of that
fact, to be regarded as consenting to the sexual activity.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
56 of 2000.
21 of 2000.
Penetrative
sexual assault.

60
4. Whoever commits penetrative sexual assault shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine;
B.—A
GGRA V ATED PENETRATIVE SEXUAL ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT THEREFOR
5. (a) Whoever, being a police officer, commits penetrative
sexual assault on a child—
(i) within the limits of the police station or premises at
which he is appointed; or,
(ii) in the premises of any station house, whether or
not situated in the police station, to which he is appointed; or
(iii) in the course of his duties or otherwise; or
(b) Whoever being a member of the armed forces or security
forces commits penetrative sexual assault on a child—
(i) within the limits of the area to which the person is
deployed; or
(ii) in any areas under the command of the forces or
armed forces; or
(iii) in the course of his duties or otherwise; or
(iv) where the said person is known or identified as a
member of the security or armed forces; or
(c) whoever being a public servant commits penetrative sexual
assault on a child; or
(d) whoever being on the management or on the staff of a
jail, remand home, protection home, observation home, or other
place of custody or care and protection established by or under any
law for the time being in force, commits penetrative sexual assault
on a child, being inmate of such jail, remand home, protection
home, observation home, or other place of custody or care and
protection; or
(e) whoever being on the management or staff of a hospital,
whether Government or private, commits penetrative sexual assault
on a child in that hospital; or
(f) whoever being on the management or staff of an
educational institution, commits penetrative sexual assault on a child
in that institution; or
(g) whoever commits gang penetrative sexual assault on a
child; or
(h) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child
using deadly weapons, fire, heated substance or corrosive substance;
or
Punishment for
Penetrative
sexual assault.
Aggravated
penetrative
sexual assault.

61
(i) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault causing
grievous hurt or causing injury to the sexual organs of the child; or
(j) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child,
which-
(i) physically incapacitates the child or causes the child
to become mentally ill or to become mentally unfit to perform
regular tasks, temporarily or permanently; or
(ii) in the case of female child, makes the child
pregnant as a consequence of sexual assault;
(iii) inflicts the child with Human Immunodeficiency
Virus or any other life threatening disease or infection which
may either temporarily or permanently impair the child by
rendering him physically incapacitated, mentally ill or mentally
unfit to perform regular tasks; or
(k) whoever, taking advantage of a child's mental or physical
disability, commits penetrative sexual assault on the child; or
(l) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on the child
more than once or repeatedly; or
(m) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child
below twelve years; or
(n) whoever being a relative of the child through blood or
adoption or marriage or guardianship or in foster care or having a
domestic relationship with a parent of the child or who is living in
the same or shared household with the child, commits penetrative
sexual assault on such child; or
(o) whoever being, in the ownership. or management, or
staff, of any institution providing services to the child, commits
penetrative sexual assault on the child; or
(p) whoever being in a position of trust or authority of a child
commits penetrative sexual assault on the child in an institution or
home of the child or any where else; or
(q) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child
knowing the child is pregnant; or
(r) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child and
attempts to murder the child; or
(s) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child in
the course of communal or sectarian violence; or
(t) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child and
who has been previously convicted of having committed any
offence under this Act or any sexual offence punishable under any
other law for the time being in force,
is said to commit aggravated penetrative sexual assault.

62
6. Whoever, commits aggravated penetrative sexual assault,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life and shall also be liable to fine.
C.—S
EXUAL ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT  THEREFOR
7. Whoever, with sexual intent touches the vagina, penis, anus
or breast of the child or makes the child touch the vagina, penis,
anus or breast of such person or any other person, or does any
other act with sexual intent which involves physical contact without
penetration is said to commit sexual assault:
Provided that where such penetrative sexual assault is
committed against a child between sixteen to eighteen years of age,
it shall be considered whether the consent for such act has been
obtained against the will of the child or the consent has been
obtained by use of violence, force, threat to use force, intoxicants,
drugs, impersonation, fraud, deceit, coercion, undue influence,
threats, when the child is sleeping or unconscious, or where the
child does not have the capacity to understand the nature of the act
or to resist it.
Explanation I .—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “consent” means the unequivocal voluntary
agreement where the person has by words, gestures, or any
form of non-verbal communication, communicated willingness
to participate in the act n1erred to in this section;
(b) “unequivocal voluntary agreement” means
willingness given for specific and be limited to the express act
consented to under this section.
Explanation II .—A child who does not offer actual physical
resistance to sexual activity is not by reason only of that fact, to
be regarded as consenting to the sexual assault.
Explanation III .—Any question which involves “sexual intent”
shall be a question of fact.
8. Whoever, commits sexual assault, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less
than three years but which may extend to five years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
D.—A
GGRAV ATED SEXUAL ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT  THEREFOR
9. (a) Whoever, being a police officer, commits sexual assault
on a child—
(i) within the limits of the police station or premises
where he is appointed; or
(ii) in the premises of any station house whether or not
situated in the police station to which he is appointed; or
Punishment for
aggravated
penetrative
sexual assault.
Sexual Asault.
Punishment for
sexual assault.
Aggravated
Sexual Assault.

63
(iii) in the course of his duties or otherwise; or
(iv) when the person is known or identified as a police
officer; or
(b) whoever, being a member of the armed forces or security
forces, commits sexual assault on a child—
(i) within the limits of the area to which the person is
deployed; or
(ii) in any areas under the command of the security or
armed forces; or
(iii) in the course of his duties or otherwise; or
(iv) where he is known or identified as a member of
the security or armed forces; or
(c) whoever being a public servant commits sexual assault on
a child; or
(d) whoever being on the management or on the staff of a
jail, or remand home or protection home or observation home, or
other place of custody or care and protection established by or
under any law for the time being in force commits sexual assault on
a child being inmate of such jail or remand home or protection
home or observation home or other place of custody or care and
protection; or
(e) whoever being on the management or staff of a hospital,
whether Government or private, commits sexual assault on a child
in that hospital; or
(f) whoever being on the management or staff of an
educational institution, commits sexual assault on a child in that
institution; or
(g) whoever commits gang sexual assault on a child; or
(h) whoever commits sexual assault on a child using deadly
weapons, fire, heated substance or corrosive substance; or
(i) whoever commits sexual assault causing grievous hurt or
causing injury to the sexual organs of the child; or
(j) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child,
which—
(i) physically incapacitates the child or causes the child
to become mentally ill or to become mentally unfit to perform
regular tasks, temporarily or permanently; or
(ii) inflicts the child with Human Immunodeficiency
Virus or any other life threatening disease or infection which
may either temporarily or permanently impair the child by
rendering him physically incapacitated, mentally ill or mentally
unfit to perform regular tasks; or

64
(k) whoever, taking advantage of a child’s mental or physical
disability, commits sexual assault on the child; or
(l) whoever commits sexual assault on the child more than
once or repeatedly; or
(m) whoever commits sexual assault on a child below twelve
years; or
(n) whoever, being a relative of the child through blood or
adoption or marriage or guardianship or in foster care, or having
domestic relationship with a parent of the child, or who is living in
the same or shared household with the child, assaults sexual assault
at such child; or
(o) whoever being in the ownership or management or staff,
of any institution providing services the child, commits sexual
assault on the child in such institution; or
(p) whoever, being in a position of trust or authority of a
child, commits sexual assault on the child in an institution or home
of the child or anywhere else; or
(q) whoever commits sexual assault on a child knowing the
child is pregnant; or
(r) whoever commits sexual assault on a child and attempts
to murder the child; or
(s) whoever commits sexual assault on a child in the course
of communal or sectarian violance; or
(t) whoever commits sexual assault on a child and who has
been previously convicted of having committed any offence under
this Act or any sexual offence punishable under any other law for
the time being in force,
is said to commit aggravated sexua1 assault.
10. Whoever, commits aggravated sexual assault shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
shall not be less than five years but which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
E.—S
EXUAL HARASSMENT  AND PUNISHMENT  THEREFOR
11. A person is said to commit sexual harassment upon a
child when such person with sexual intent,-
(i) utters any word or makes any sound, or makes any
gesture or exhibits any object or part of body with the
intention that such word or sound shall be heard, or such
gesture at object or part of body shall be seen by the child; or
(ii) makes a child exhibit his body or any part of his
body so as it is seen by such person or any other person; or
Punishment for
aggravated sexual
assault.
Sexual
harassment.

65
(iii) shows any object to a child in any form or media
for pornographic purposes; or
(iv) repeatedly or constantly follows or watches or
contacts a child either directly or through any means; or
(v) threatens to use, in any form of media, a real or
fabricated depiction through electronic; film or digital or any
other mode, of any part of the body of the child or the
involvement of the child in a sexual act.
Explanation .—Any question which involves “sexual intent”
shall be a question of fact.
12. Whoever commits sexual harassment upon a child shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.
CHAPTER III
U
SING CHILD FOR PORNOGRAPHIC PURPOSES AND PUNISHMENT THEREFOR
13. Whoever, uses a child in any form of media (including
programme or advertisement telecast by television channels or
internet or any other electronic form or printed form, whether or
not such programme or advertisement is intended for personal use
or for distribution), for the purposes of sexual gratification, which
includes—
(a) representation of the sexual organs of a child;
(b) usage of a child engaged in real or simulated sexual
acts (with or without penetration);
(c) the indecent or obscene representation of a child,
shall be guilty of the offence of using a child for pornographic
purposes.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the
expression “use a child” shall include involving a child through any
medium like print, electronic, computer or any other technology for
preparation, production, offering, transmitting, publishing, facilitation
and distribution of the pornographic material.
14. (1) Whoever, uses a child or children for pornographic
purposes shall be liable for rigorous imprisonment which may
extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine and in us the
event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years and
also with fine.
(2) If the person using the child for pornographic purposes
commits any offence referred to in section 3, or section 5, or
section 7, or section 9, by directly participating in pornographic ads,
he shall be punishable for life imprisonment and shall also be liable
to fine.
Punishment
for sexual
harassment.
Use of child
for
pornographic
purposes.
Punishment for
using child for
pornographic
purposes.

66
15. Any person, who stores, for commercial purposes any
pornographic material in any form involving a child shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description which may extend
to three years or with fine or with both.
CHAPTER IV
ABETMENT OF AND ATTEMPT TO COMMIT AN OFFENCE
16. A person abets an offence, who—
First.—Instigates any person to do that offence; or
Secondly.—Engages with one or more other person or
persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that offence, if an
act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that
conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that offence; or
Thirdly .—Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal
omission, the doing of that offence.
Explanation I .—A person who, by wilful misrepresentation,
or by wilful concealment of a material fact, which he is bound to
disclose, voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to cause
procure a thing to be done, is said to instigate the doing of that
offence.
Explanation II .—Whoever, either prior to or at the time of
commission of an act, does anything in order to facilitate the
commission of that act, and thereby facilitates the commission
thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act.
17. Whoever abets any offence under this Act, if the act
abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment, shall be
punished with punishment provided for that offence.
Explanation .—An act or offence is said to be committed in
consequence of abetment, when it is committed in consequence of
the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy or with the aid,
which constitutes the abetment.
18. Whoever attempts to commit any offence punishable
under this Act or to cause such an offence to be committed, and
in such attempt, does any act towards the commission of the
offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
which may extend to one year or with fine or with both.
CHAPTER V
PROCEDURE  FOR REPORTING  OF CASES
19. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, any person (including the child), who
apprehends that an offence under this Act is likely to be committed
or has knowledge that such an offence has been committed, he shall
provide such information to,—
(a) the Special Juvenile Police Unit; or
(b) the local police.
Punishment for
storage of
pornographic
material
involving child.
Punishment for
abetment.
Abetment of an
offence.
Punishment for
attempt to
commit an
offence.
Reporting of
offences. 2 of 1974.

67
(2) Every report given under sub-section ( 1) shall be—
(a) ascribed an entry number and recorded in writing;
(b) be read over to the informant;
(c) shall be entered in a book to be kept by the Police
Unit.
(3) Where the report under sub-section ( 1) is given by a
child, the same shall be recorded under sub-section ( 2) in a simple
language so that the child understands contents being recorded.
(4) In case contents are being recorded in the language not
understood by the child or wherever it is deemed necessary, a
translator or an interpreter shall be provided to the child if he fails
to understand the same.
(5) Where the Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police is
satisfied that the child against whom an offence has been committed
is in need of care and protection, then, it shall, after recording the
reasons in writing, make immediate arrangement to give him such
care and protection (including admitting the child into shelter home
or to the nearest hospital) within twenty-four hours of the report,
as may be required.
(6) The Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police shall,
without unnecessary delay but within a period of twenty-four hours,
report the matter to the Special Court or where no Special Court
has been designated, to the Court of Session, including need of the
child for care and protection and steps taken in this regard.
20. Any personnel of the media or hotel or lodge or hospital
or club or studio or 20 photographic facilities, by whatever name
called, irrespective of the number of persons employed therein,
shall, oncoming across any material or object which is sexually
exploitative of the child (including pornographic, sexually-related or
making obscene representation of a child or children) through the
use of any medium, shall provide such information to the Special
Juvenile Police Unit, or to the local police, as the case may be.
21. ( 1) Any person, who fails to report an offence under sub-
section ( 1) of section 19 or section 20 or who fails to record such
offence under sub-section ( 2) of section 19 shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description which may extend to six months
or with fine or with both.
(2) Any person, being in-charge of any company or an
institution (by whatever name called) who fails to report the
commission of an offence under sub-section ( 1) of section 19 in
respect of a subordinate under his control, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with
fine.
(3) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall not apply to a
child under this Act.
Obligation of
media, studio
and
photographic
facilities to
report cases.
Punishment for
failure to report
or record a case.

68
22. ( 1) Any person, who makes false complaint or provides
false information against any person, in respect of an offence
committed on a child below the age of sixteen years, under sections
3, 5, 7 and section 9, solely with the intention to humiliate, extort or
threaten or defame him, shall be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to six months or with fine or with both.
(2) Where a false complaint has been made or raise
information has been provided by a child, being less than sixteen
years, no punishment shall be imposed on such child.
(3) Where a false complaint has been made or false
information has been provided by a child being more than sixteen
years, and it is proved that the complaint was made or information
was provided with his own informed decision and in such case, the
child shall be sent to the Juvenile Justice Board constituted under
section 4 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2000, for suitable remedial action.
(4) Whoever, not being a child, makes a false complaint or
provides false information against a child, knowing it to be false,
thereby victimizing such child in any of the offences under this Act,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to one year
or with fine or with both.
23. ( 1) No person shall make any report or present comments
on any child from any form of media or studio or photographic
facilities without having complete and authentic information, and
without the consent of the child or his parents or guardian, who
may be involved in an offence under this Act either as an accused
or as a victim, which may have the effect of lowering his character
or infringing upon his privacy.
(2) No reports in any media shall disclose, without the
consent of the child or his parents or guardian, the identity of a
child including his name, address, photograph, family details,
school, neighbourhood or any other particulars which may lead to
disclosure of identity of the child.
(3) The publisher or owner of the media or studio or
photographic facilities shall be jointly and severally liable for the acts
and omissions of his employee.
(4) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-
section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) shall be liable to be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a period which shall not be
less than one year but which may extend to two years or with fine
or with both.
CHAPTER VI
P
ROCEDURES  FOR RECORDING  STATEMENT OF THE CHILD
24. ( 1) For the purposes of recording the statement of the child,
the provisions of section 157 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
shall apply.
56 of 2000.
Punishment for
false complaint
or false
information.
Recording of
statement of a
child.
Procedure for
media.
2 of 1974.

69
(2) If the statement of the child is being recorded under
section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Magistrate
recording such statement shall, notwithstanding anything contained
therein, record the statement as spoken by the child in the presence
of the parents of the child or any other person in whom the child
has trust or confidence:
Provided that the Magistrate may wherever necessary, take
the assistance of an interpreter while recording the statement of the
child:
Provided further that the Magistrate may, in case of a child
having a mental or physical disability, seek the assistance of a
special educator or an expert in that field record statement of the
child.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 164 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 where any statement of the child
is recorded by audio-video electronic means, it shall be recorded in
the presence of the parents of the child or any other person in
whom the child has trust or confidence.
(4) The provisions contained in the first proviso to sub-
section ( 1) of section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
shall, so far it permits the presence of the advocate of the accused
shall not apply in this case.
(5) The magistrate shall provide to the child or his
representative, a copy of the document specified under section 207
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, upon the final report
being filed by the police under section 173 of that Code.
25. Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-
section ( 1) of section 24, the police officer while recording the
statement of the child shall not be present in his uniform.
26. The police officer making the investigation, shall, while
examining the child, ensure that at no point of time the child come
in the contact in any way with the accused.
27. The medical examination of a child in respect of whom any
offence has been committed under this Act, shall, notwithstanding
that a First Information Report or complaint has not been registered
for the offences under this Act, be conducted in accordance with
section 164A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
CHAPTER VII
S
PECIAL  C OURTS
28. ( 1) For the purposes of providing a speedy trial, the State
Government shall in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High
Court, by notification in the Official Gazette, designate for each
district, a Court of Session to be a Special Court to try the offences
under the Act.
Police officer
not to be in
uniform.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
Accused not to
be in contact.
Medical
examination of
a child.
Designation of
Special Courts.

70
(2) While trying an offence under this Act, a Special Court
shall also try an offence other than the offence referred to in sub-
section ( 1), with which the accused may, under the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, be charged at the same trial.
(3) The Special Court constituted under this Act,
notwithstanding anything in the Information Technology Act, 2000,
shall have jurisdiction to try offences under section 67B of that Act
in so far as it relates to publication or transmission of sexually
explicit material depicting children in any act, or conduct or manner
or facilitates abuse of children online.
29. Where a person is prosecuted for violating any of the
provisions under sections 3, 5, 7 and section 9 of this Act, and
where the victim is a child below the age of sixteen years, the
Special Court sha1l presume, that such person has committed the
offence, unless the contrary is proved.
30. (1) In any prosecution for any offence under this Act
which requires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused,
the Special Court shall presume the existence of such mental state
but it shall be a defence for the accused to prove the fact that he
had no such mental state with respect to the act charged as an
offence in that prosecution.
(2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be
proved only when the Special Court believes it to exist beyond
reasonable doubt and not merely when its existence is established by
a preponderance of probability.
Explanation .—In this section, “culpable mental state” includes
intention, motive, knowledge of a fact and the belief in, or reason
to believe, a fact.
31. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (including the provisions as
to bail and bonds) shall apply to the proceedings before a Special
Court and for the purposes of the said provisions, the Special Court
shall be deemed to be a Court of Sessions and the person
conducting a prosecution before a Special Court, shall be deemed to
be a Public Prosecutor.
32. ( 1) The State Government shall, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint a Specia1 Public Prosecutor for every Special
Court for conducting cases only under the provisions of this Act.
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Special
Public Prosecutor under sub-section ( 1) only if he had been in
practice for not less than seven years as an advocate.
(3) Every person appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor
under this section shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within
the meaning of clause ( u) of section 2 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 and provision of that Code shall have effect
accordingly.
Presumption as
to certain
offences.
2 of 1974.
21 of 2000.
Presumption of
culpable mental
state.
Application of
Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973
to proceedings
before a Special
Court.
Special Public
Prosecutors.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

71
CHAPTER III
PROCEDURE AND POWERS OF SPECIAL COURTS AND RECORDING OF EVIDENCE
33. ( 1) A Special Court may take cognizance of any offence,
without the accused being committed to it for trial, upon receiving
a complaint of facts which constitute such offence, or upon a
police report of such facts.
(2) The Special Public Prosecutor, or as the case may be, the
counsel appearing for the accused shall, while recording the
examination-in-chief, cross-examination or re-examination of the
child, communicate the questions to be put to the child to the
Special Court which shall in turn put those questions to the child.
(3) The Special Court may, if it considers necessary, permit
frequent breaks for the child during the trial.
(4) The Special Court shall create a child-friendly atmosphere
by allowing a family member, a guardian, a friend or a relative, in
whom the child has trust or confidence, to be present in the court.
(5) The Special Court shall ensure that the child is not called
repeatedly to testify in the court.
(6) The Special Court shall not permit aggressive questioning
or character assassination of the child and ensure that dignity of the
child is maintained at all times during the trial.
(7) The Special Court shall ensure that the identity of the
child is not disclosed at any time during the course of investigation
or trial, except with the consent of the child or his parents or
guardian.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, the
identity of the child shall include the identity of the child’s family,
school, relatives, neighbourhood or any other information by which
the identity of the child may be revealed.
(8) In appropriate cases, the Special Court may, in addition to
the punishment, direct payment of compensation to the child for any
physical or mental trauma caused to him or for immediate
rehabilitation of such child.
(9) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Special Court
shall, for the purpose of the trial of any offence under this Act,
have all the powers of a Court of Session and shall try such offence
as if it were a Court of Session, and as far as may be, in
accordance with the procedure specified in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 for trial before a Court of Session.
34. ( 1) Where any offence under this Act is committed by a
child, such child shall be dealt with under the provisions of the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000.
(2) If any question arises in any proceeding before the Special
Court whether a person is a child or not, such question shall be
Procedure and
powers of
Special Court.
Procedure in
case of
commission of
offence by
child and
determination
of age by
Special Court.
2 of 1974.
56 of 2000.

72
determined by the Special Court after satisfying itself about the age
of such person and it shall record in writing its reasons for such
determination.
(3) No order made by the Special Court shall be deemed to
be invalid merely by any subsequent proof that the age of a person
as determined by it under sub-section ( 2) was not the correct age
of that person.
35. (1) The evidence of the child shall be recorded within a
period of thirty days of the Special Court taking cognizance of the
offence and reasons for delay, if any, shall be recorded by the
Special Court.
(2) The Special Court shall complete the trial, as far as
possible, within a period of one year from the date of taking
cognizance of the offence.
36. ( 1) The Special Court shall ensure that the child is not
exposed in any way to the accused at the time of recording of the
evidence, while at the same time ensuring that the accused is in a
position to hear the statement of the child and communicate with his
advocate.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the Special Court
may record the statement of a child through video conferencing or
by utilising single visibility mirrors or curtains or any other device.
37. The Special Court shall try cases in camera and in the
presence of the parents of the child or any other person in whom
the child has trust or confidence:
Provided that where the Special Court is of the opinion that
the child needs to be examined at a place other than the court, it
shall proceed to issue a commission in accordance with the
provisions of section 284 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
38.  ( 1) Wherever necessary, the Court may take the
assistance of an interpreter while recording the evidence of the
child.
(2) If a child has a mental or physical disability, the Special
Court may take the assistance of a special educator or an expert in
that field to record the evidence of the child.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
39. Subject to such roles as may be made in this behalf, the
State Government shall prepare guidelines for use of non-
governmental organisations, professionals and experts or persons
having knowledge of psychology, social work, physical health,
mental health and child development to be associated whit the pre-
trial and trial stage to assist the child.
Period for
recording of
evidence of
child and
disposal of
case.
Child not to see
accused at the
time of
testifying.
Trials to be
conducted in
camera .
Assistance of an
interpreter or
expert while
recording
evidence of
child.
2 of 1974.
Guidelines for
child to take
assistance of
experts etc.

73
40. Subject to the provisio to section 301 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 the family or the guardian of the child
shall be entitled to the assistance of a legal counsel of their choice
for any offence under this Act:
Provided that if the family or the guardian of the child are
unable to afford a legal counsel, the Legal Services Authority shall
provide a lawyer to them.
41. The provisions of sections 3 to 13 (both inclusive) shall
not apply in case of medical examination or medical treatment of a
child when such medical examination or medical treatment is
undertaken with the consent of his parents or guardian.
42. Where an act or omission constitute an offence punishable
under this Act and also under any other law for the time being in
force, then, notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the
time being in force, the offender found guilty of such offence shall
be liable to punishment only under such law or this Act as provides
for punishment which is greater in degree.
43. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or  annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
44. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to
be necessary or expedient 40 for removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after
the expiry of the period of two years from the commencement of
this Act
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
2 of 1974.
Right of child
to take
assistance of
legal
practitioner.
Provisions of
sections 3 to
13 not to
apply in
certain cases.
Alternative
punishment.
Power to make
rules.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

74
THE SCHEDULE
[See section 2( c)]
ARMED FORCES AND S ECURITY  FORCES  CONSTITUTED  UNDER
(a) The Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of l950);
(b) The Army Act, 1950 (46 of l950);
(c) The Assam Rifles Act, 2006 (47 of 2006);
(d) The Bombay Home Guard Act, 1947;
(e) The Border Security Force Act, 1968 (47 of 1968);
(f) The Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968 (50 of 1968);
(g) The Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949 (66 of 1949);
(h) The Coast Guard Act, 1978 (30 of 1978);
(i) The Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946);
(j) The Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force Act, 1992 (35 of 1992);
(k) The Navy Act, 1957 (62 of  1951);
(l) The National Investigation Agency Act, 2008 (34 of 2008);
(m) The National Security Guard Act, 1986 (47 of 1986);
(n) The Railway Protection Force Act, 1957 (23 of 1957);
(o) The Sashastra Seema Bal Act, 2007 (53 of 2007);
(p) The Special Protection Group Act, 1988 (34 of 1988);
(q) The Territorial Army Act, 1948 (56 of 1948);
(r) The State police forces (including armed constabulary)
constituted under the State laws to aid the civil powers of the
State and empowered to employ force during internal disturbances
or otherwise including armed forces as defined in clause ( a) of
section 2 of the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 (28 of
1958).
74

75
75
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 15 of the Constitution, inter alia , confers upon the
State powers to make special provision for children. Further, article
39, inter alia , provides that the State shall in particular direct its
policy towards securing that the tender age of children are not
abused and their childhood and youth are protected against
exploitation and they are given facilities to develop in a healthy
manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity.
2. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Children,
ratified by India on 11th  December, 1992, requires the State Parties
to undertake all appropriate national, bilateral and multilateral measures
to prevent (a) the inducement or coercion of a child to engage in any
unlawful sexual activity; (b) the exploitative use of children in
prostitution or other unlawful sexual practices; and (c) the exploitative
use of children in pornographic performances and materials.
3. The data collected by the National Crime Records Bureau
shows that there has been increase in cases of sexual offences
against children. This is corroborated by the ‘Study on Child Abuse:
India 2007’ conducted by the Ministry of Women and Child
Development. Moreover, sexual offences against children are not
adequately addressed by the extant laws. A large number of such
offences are neither specifically provided for nor are they adequately
penalised. The interests of the child, both as a victim as well as a
witness, need to be protected. It is felt that offences against
children need to be defined explicitly and countered through
commensurate penalties as an effective deterrence.
4. It is, therefore, proposed to enact a self contained
comprehensive legislation inter alia  to provide for protection of
children from the offences of sexual assault, sexual harassment and
pornography with due regard for safeguarding the interest and well
being of the child at every-stage of the judicial process,
incorporating child-friendly procedures for reporting, recording of
evidence, investigation and trial of offences and provision for
establishment of Special Courts for speedy trial of such offences.
5. The Bill would contribute to enforcement of the right of
all children to safety, security and protection from sexual abuse and
exploitation.
6. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various
provisions contained in the Bill.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI;
The 16th March, 2011. KRISHNA TIRATH

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.