15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
HUNDRED FIFTY- FOURTH REPORT
ON
FUNCTIONING OF NAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS
 
 (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 3RD   MARCH, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 2ND MARCH, 2005)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2005/ PHALGUNA, 1926 (SAKA)
 
 
C O N T E N T S
1.                  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.                  PREFACE
3.                  REPORT
4.                  OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
5.                  MINUTES
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
 
 
1. Shri Vayalar Ravi                      ¾        Chairman
 
MEMBERS
            RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Eduardo Faleiro
3. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
4. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
5. Shrimati Chandra Kala Pandey
6.
      Shri S. Anbalagan
7. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
8. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
9. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
10. Shri Anil Dhirubhai Ambani
 
LOK SABHA
 
11. Shri Basudeb Barman
12. Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
13. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
14. Shri R. L. Jalappa
15. Shri Ramswarup Koli
16. Shri Manjunath Kunnur
17. Shri Y.G. Mahajan
18. Shri Manoj Kumar
19. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
20. Dr. Thokchom Meinya

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
21. Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
22.  Mohd. Mukim
23.  Shri Tukaram R. Patil
24. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
25. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
26. Shri Tufani Saroj
27. Smt. P. Satheedevi
28. Shri A.R. Shaheen
29. Smt. Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
30. Shri K. Virupaxappa
31. Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
 
PREFACE
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development, having
been authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf this Hundred-Fifty Fourth Report on the ‘Functioning of
Navodaya Vidyalayas’.
2.         The Navodaya  Vidyalayas were set up by the Government primarily with the view to providing quality education upto
the secondary level to the children predominantly from the rural areas at an affordable cost.  These Vidyalayas, after several years
of their existence, have no doubt, shown good results but their functioning leaves a lot to be desired. Concerns have been
expressed on different aspects of their working by all concerned ¾ students, teachers, parents, educationists and the general
public as well.  The Committee also had invariably been emphasising the need for taking remedial measures for addressing those
concerns, but with no signs of visible improvement. 
3.         The Committee decided to make an indepth study of this unique and premier school system covering all aspects of its
functioning with a view to identifying the problem areas and suggesting measures for tackling them.
4.         The Committee visited several Navodaya Vidyalayas in different parts of the country and held discussions with the
teaching/non-teaching staff, students, parents, State Government authorities and also the general public.
5.         The Committee sought written replies on detailed questionnaire prepared on the basis of various documents/papers
furnished by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education and also on issues/problem areas highlighted during its on-the-
spot visits to some of  the Vidyalayas and deliberations held there.  The Committee also held extensive discussions with the
Secretary, Department of Secondary and Higher Education and Commissioner, Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti and other concerned
officials on a number of occasions.
th

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
6.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 26  February, 2005.
New Delhi;
February 26, 2005
Phalguna 7. 1926, (Saka)
Vayalar Ravi
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development
 
 
 
REPORT
 
I           INTRODUCTION
 
1.1       The National Policy on Education-1986 envisaged establishment of a Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya (JNV) in each district
of the country. The Navodaya Vidyalayas (NVs) are fully residential, co-educational institutions covering classes VI to XII. The
Navodaya Vidyalaya Scheme started with two model schools in 1985-86 at present, covers 509 Districts in 34 States/UTs of the
country.
 
OBJECTIVES
 
            The main objectives of the JNVs as set forth are:
 
1.         To provide good quality modern education including a strong component of culture, inculcation of values, awareness of
the environment, adventure activities and physical education to the talented children predominantly from the rural areas
irrespective of their family’s socio economic condition;
2.          To serve the objectives of excellence coupled with equality and social justice.
3.          To ensure that all students of Navodaya Vidyalayas attain a reasonable level of competence in three languages as
envisaged in Three Language Formula;
4.          To promote national integration by providing opportunities to talented children, largely from rural areas of the country to
live and learn together and develop their full potential, and
5.         To serve, in each district, as focal points for improvement in the quality of school education in general, through sharing of
experiences and facilities.
 
           SALIENT FEATURES
 
The following features establish the separate identity of JNVs: -
           
(i)                  Good quality modern education for talented children predominantly from rural areas.
(ii)                Ratio/class of candidates  - 
Rural, atleast   75%, Urban at the most    25%
(iii)               Reservation of seats for students from SC/ST categories in proportion to their population in the district subject to the
national minimum.
(iv)              Reservation of seats for girls - 33%.
(v)                Co-educational and fully residential, upto Class-XII.
(vi)              Location- usually in rural areas on the basis of offer of cost free land and rent free temporary buildings by State/UT
Governments.
(vii)             Free education including boarding and lodging as well as expenses on uniforms, text books, and stationery etc.
(viii)           Affiliated to CBSE.
(ix)              Admission in only Class-VI through objective type test designed and conducted by CBSE.
(x)                Implementation of three-language formula.
(xi)              Regional language as medium of instruction for first three years and Hindi/English afterwards.
(xii)30% of students in Class IX from a Vidyalaya located in one linguistic area spend one academic year in a Vidyalaya in a
different linguistic region to promote national integration through understanding of the diversity and plurality of
country’s culture and people.
 
II    Organizational set-up
 
2.1       The Navodaya Vidyalayas are managed by Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti (NVS) which is an autonomous organization of

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Secondary and Higher Education.  The Samiti functions through an
Executive Committee under the Chairmanship of the Union Minister of Human Resource Development. Union Minister of State
of Education is normally the Vice-Chairman of the Samiti.  Members of Parliament, representatives from industry, representatives
from State Governments and eminent educationists are nominated as Members of the Samiti. The Executive Committee is assisted
by Finance Committee and Academic Advisory Committee in its functions.
 
2.2       For each Vidyalaya, there is a Vidyalaya Advisory Committee and a Vidyalaya Management Committee for the general
supervision of the Vidyalaya. District Magistrate of the concerned district is the Chairman of these Committees with local
educationists, public representatives and officials from the district as members.
 
III        Norms for opening of Navodaya Vidyalayas 
3.1       As envisaged in the scheme, one Navodaya Vidyalaya each is to be established in all the districts, which were in existence
in the country at the commencement of Eighth Five Year Plan. However, due to reorganization/creation of new districts
subsequently during the Ninth Five Year Plan and thereafter, several new districts have been created in many States and proposals
have been received from the State Governments for opening more JNVs. Accordingly, it has been decided to cover 574 districts
existing in the country (excluding Tamil Nadu which has not yet accepted the Scheme). As on 31.8.04, JNVs have been
sanctioned in 509 districts of the country. Remaining 65 districts are proposed to be covered by the end of Tenth Plan Period.
 
3.2       The Committee was given to understand that out of 509 sanctioned JNVs, 485 JNVs are functional.  Out of the remaining
24 non-functional JNVs, 9 have been sanctioned only during the years 2003-04 and 2004-2005 and are likely to start functioning
from the next academic year.  The Committee is, however, constrained to note that out of the remaining 15 non-functional JNVs,
three JNVs, one each in Bihar, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh were sanctioned in 2001-2002, ten JNVs, one each in Gujarat,
Haryana, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Tripura, UP and Uttaranchal and two in Mizoram were sanctioned in 2002-2003.  In
all these cases, temporary accommodation has not been made available by the concerned State Governments so far.  The
Committee fails to understand the reasons behind the inability of the State Governments in fulfilling the minimum requirements
for proposals initiated by them. The Committee observes that majority of these districts are located in remote and tribal areas
where JNVs are primarily required to be opened. The Committee is particularly disturbed by the situation in Mizoram. The
Committee finds that out of the six JNVs sanctioned in Mizoram, two JNVs opened – one in 1987-1988 in Lungli District and the
other in Chimtupui District in 1992-93 had to be closed down due to less enrolment and administrative reasons. In respect of three
JNVs sanctioned in 2002-2003, temporary accommodation is yet to be made available.  At present, only one JNV is functional.
The remaining two districts of the State are yet to be covered. The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need for the
Department for taking up such cases at the highest level.  The Committee feels that given the peculiar geographical location and
the overall backwardness of the North-East region, the Central Government should make special efforts on meeting all the
requirements to make JNVs functional at the earliest.
 
3.3.      The Committee recommends that concerted efforts should be made to expedite not only the sanctioning of all the 574
JNVs, but also to make them functional in a time bound manner. The Committee would like the Ministry to play the role of a
facilitator in clearing the proposals received as well as in encouraging other proposals to be put up for opening new schools in the
remaining districts.
 
3.4       As per the information made available to the Committee, out of the 485 functioning JNVs, only 368 JNVs are functioning
in permanent sites and 117 JNVs are functioning at temporary sites.  The Committee was given to understand that 35 JNVs are
likely to be completed by 31
st March 2005, 6 JNVs by 31st March 2006, 1 by 31st August, 2006, in respect of 13 JNVs, land is yet
to be transferred, and land allotted to 2 JNVs was under dispute.
 

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
3.5       The Committee is not aware about the latest position in all such cases.  The Committee, however, apprehends that no
significant progress would be there in most of the cases.  The Committee observes that different construction agencies both state
and national level are involved in the construction of school buildings.  The Committee, however, finds that civil construction in
the schools was generally running much behind the schedule, because of one reason or the other.  Apart from non-availability of
funds in time, the Committee found that long procedures and lack of proper coordination between different agencies involved in
the exercise were responsible for such delays resulting in time and cost over-run, which must be avoided.  The Committee
strongly feels that there should be a mechanism at central level working in co-ordination with all concerned state authorities which
would constantly monitor all such cases as per time bound action plan. The Committee would also like the Ministry to prepare a
consolidated estimate required for construction of pending buildings and plead strongly for that fund with the Ministry of Finance.
 
3.6       The Committee was informed that opening of JNVs depends upon receipt of the proposals from the concerned States/UT
Governments offering 30 acres of suitable land free of cost with sufficient temporary buildings and other infrastructure free of rent
or on permanent basis to accommodate 240 students and staff for three to four years or till the Samiti constructs its own buildings
at the permanent site. The Committee notes that the Samit is, however, not very rigid about the criteria of 30 acres of land which
can be relaxed to the extent of 10 acres of land in hilly areas or wherever there is extreme scarcity of land on case to case basis. 
 
 
3.7       The Committee was informed that 104 JNVs are located in less than 30 acres of land, { with the minimum area of land
(9.5 acres)  in JNV Bhadoi district, UP } out of which maximum number of 29 JNVs are located in Chandigarh region; as many as
26 JNVs do not have any play field; and most of the JNVs in J&K are not having even a permanent school building. The
Committee appreciates the compulsions to relax the condition of 30 acres of land in selective cases where land is scarce. 
However, the Committee recommends that the relaxation should be granted only after carefully examining the interests of the
students and their development.  For example, the paucity of land should not be a constraint for games & sports facilities and for
this the sports facilities available in nearby schools, institutions, clubs etc, could be shared so that the students are not deprived of
their educational and developments needs.  The Committee would also emphasise that all efforts should be made to provide
required facilities in JNVs   which can be made available in less than 30 acres of land area at the earliest.
 
IV        INFRASTRUCTURE
4.1       Every Navodaya Vidyalaya is stipulated to have a school building on 2000 sq. meters of space, having 30 classrooms, a
library, a computer room, a staff room, laboratory, six dormitories, boys and girls hostels, dining & kitchen facility, residence for
faculty & staff with ample open spaces for play and recreation.  A Smriti Van in the memory of late Sh. Rajiv Gandhi, former
Prime Minister of India, forms an integral part of all the Navodaya School campuses.  Besides, the provision for underground
water tank, one tubewell, a sub-station building, proper sewerage system, water supply and boundary wall for the entire building
also forms the components of the scheme.
 
4.2       The Committee during its visits observed general lack of or poor infrastructure in the Navodaya Vidyalayas. Same was the
report given by many witnesses with whom the Committee held discussions.  Upkeep of the buildings and facilities both in
schools and in hostels were found not upto the mark.  Less said is better about the infrastructure of Smriti Vans. 
 
4.3       The Committee was given to understand that out of 485 functional JNVs as on 31.8.2004, 368 JNVs are functioning in
permanent site.  The Committee, however, observes that out of these 368 JNVs, 104 are having land area less than the prescribed
areas of 30 acres.  And out of these JNVs, 11 JNVs are having less than 18 acres, 9 JNVs are having temporary buildings,
situation is really bad in J&K as out of 13 JNVs, 4 are running in S.P. sheds and 1 in temporary building.  The Committee is not

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
satisfied about the buildings and infrastructure available in the remaining JNVs in the state, as exact details have not been made
known to the Committee. Actual status of buildings and infrastructure of JNVs in Chandigarh, Hyderabad and Jaipur Region has
also not been made available to the Committee.  The Committee apprehends that these JNVs must be in a bad state, totally lacking
the minimum requirements.  The Committee is also not aware about the status of JNVs having 30 acres of land and functioning
from permanent sites.  The Committee feels that JNVs functioning from permanent site does not seem to make much difference. 
The Committee wonders about the factors delaying the provision of required infrastructure once land is made available.  The
Committee recommends that all JNVs having permanent site should be provided required buildings and infrastructure without any
delay.  The Committee strongly feels that an effective monitoring mechanism should be evolved for accomplishing this over
delayed task.  The Department/NVS should work out a time bound action plan in this regard in active coordination with Regional
Offices, State authorities and district administration.  Funds as and when required should be provided for this purpose but on the
condition that all works are implemented at the earliest.
 
4.4       The Committee further recommends that apart from providing the requisite basic infrastructure, provision for fire safety
should also be made on priority basis to make the buildings safer. Regular inspections should be made to see that buildings etc
were properly maintained.  The school authorities should also discuss the problem of maintenance of building in the Parents
Teachers Meetings, so that the local authorities could be pressurized to do the job.
 
V         STUDENT INTAKE
 
5.1       Prescribed student intake per Navodaya Vidyalaya is 600 students i.e. 400 boys and 200 girls.  The Committee is,
however, surprised to note that only 33 NVs have student intake ranging from 502 to 572.  Student strength as on 31.3.04 is much
below the prescribed limit in the remaining functional 452 NVs.  Position in some Regions is very disturbing.  Details as indicated
below are self-revealing: -
 
Region No. of JNVs Average student strength
Shillong 58 262
Pune 53 324
Chandigarh 42 328
Patna 50 343
Lucknow 66 350
Bhopal 75 351
Jaipur 47 379
 
           
Some of the state-wise figures are a cause for serious concern. The Committee apprehends that school-wise position would
be even more damaging. The Committee fails to understand the factors responsible for overall student intake in JNVs remaining
much below the prescribed limit.  Either JNVs have failed to attract students or adequate infrastructure for required student
capacity is not there.  Both the situations are very discouraging.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should take steps for conducting a survey for analyzing the reasons for low intake of student in JNVs with particular focus on the
JNVs having very low figures and based on the findings of the survey, take remedial action.  The Committee feels that except
under unavoidable circumstances, the seats must not be allowed to remain vacant.  The Committee opines that a merit list of all
the students aspiring for the admission may be prepared and the vacancies, if any, may be filled up from amongst the candidates in
the list after relaxing the qualifying forms.  The candidates belonging to weaker section of the society should be given preference
while filling up such vacancies.
 
VI        COMPUTER EDUCATION IN NAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS
 

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
6.1       JNVs being model pace-setting institutions in the district are equipped with required educational technology including
computers.  The Committee was given to understand that computers have been provided to 454 JNVs.  Under the Computer
Education Programme, each Vidyalaya is equipped to develop a Computer lab with minimum 7 P-III computers.  The main
objectives of Computer Education Programme of the Vidyalayas are to:
 
·                    Facilitate the students to learn computer literacy and hands on experience from class VI to XII.
·                    Create computer culture and consciousness among the young rural students.
·                    Familiarize the students with different range of computer applications and help them to understand the potential of
Information Technology in learning process.
·                    Integrate Information Technology with classroom transaction.
·                    Improving the capacities of the children in terms of their performance in scholastic and non-scholastic activities.
·                    Empower the teachers to use computers as one of their important teaching aid.
·                    Extending the facility of Computer Literacy to the students of neighborhood schools.
 
6.2       The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Samiti in the field of Computer education.  It, however, notices that
a large number of schools were yet to have this facility. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the JNVs should be
covered under this scheme at the earliest. The Committee opines that the maintenance and connectivity with Internet should be
ensured to get optimum utilization of computers.  The Committee recommends that all the teachers should be encouraged and
suitably trained to work on computers.
 
VII      SMART SCHOOLS SCHEME
 
7.1       33 Vidyalayas have been identified as SMART Schools with one JNV from each State/UT.  Computer Equipment
comprising 34 computers (2 Server Computers, and 32 Node Computers), one Multimedia LCD Projector, one Laser Printer, one
Scanner, one CD Writer, one Modem, 6 UPSs (2 UPSs for Server Computers and 4 UPSs for Node Computers) are supplied to
each JNV selected as Smart School in addition to existing quota of computer equipment.  These Vidyalayas have developed
Computer Lab(s) with LAN facility.
7.2       The Committee recommends that more Vidyalayas may be covered under the scheme.  Local M.P. and MLA can be
associated for extending funds to such Vidyalayas for purchasing computers.
 
VIII     FUNDING
8.1       The Committee was informed that the Samiti while submitting the Xth Five Year Plan proposal, had initially projected the
total requirement of funds amounting to Rs.6,958.03 crore, as follows:
(Amount -in Crore)
Sl.No. Activity Projections
Non-Plan Plan Total
I. For continuation of Navodaya Vidyalaya
Scheme in respect of Units established/
sanctioned till the end of IX Plan (viz.468
Vidyalayas, 8 Regional Offices, 5 Training
Centres and Hqrs. Office of NVS)
1942.80 1921.94 3864.74
II. For Expansion and New Initiatives of the
Scheme
- 3093.29 3093.29
 Total (I & II) 1942.80 5015.23 6958.03
           
8.2       Against this requirement, the Ministry fixed the plan outlay to Rs.2, 000.00 crore only.   This is in addition to the
following Grants-in-aid provided by the Ministry for the Ist three years of X plan is as follows.
                                                                           (Amount - in Crore)
YEAR 
                                                 GRANT-IN-AID
 

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
                        NON-PLAN              PLAN
 
            2002-03                                     122.60                       360.00
2003-04                                                                        130.00                      439.56
2004-05                                                                        131.00                      392.00
 
8.3       Curtailment of funds by the Ministry for Xth Plan has forced the Samiti to restrict its activities to the extent of allocated
funds, as per details given below.
(Amount -in Crore)
Sl.
No.
Activity Revised Projections for X Plan
Non-Plan Plan Total
I. For continuation of Navodaya Vidyalaya Scheme
in respect of Units established/sanctioned till the
end  of Ninth Plan (viz 468 Vidyalayas, 8
Regional Offices, 5 Training Centres and Hqrs.'
Office of NVS)
748.50 2531.05 3279.55
II. For Expansion and New Initiatives of the Scheme - - No projections proposed
due to plan outlay of
Rs.2,000/- crore only
approved for X Plan
 Total (I & II) 748.50 2531.05 3279.55
 
Requirement of fund proposed for X five year Plan towards continuation of Navodaya Vidyalaya Scheme in respect of
Units established/sanctioned till the end of IX Plan (viz. 468 Vidyalayas 8 Regional Offices, 5 Training Centres and Hqrs.
office of NVs.
 
(Amount – in Crore)
 
Sl.No. Head of Account Anticipated Expenditure
  Non-Plan Plan Total
1. Staff Payment (Salaries etc.)
 
424.07 500.25 924.32
2. Expenditure on Students 102.54 551.60 654.14
3. Other Recurring Expenditure 154.00 200.28 354.28
4. Non-Recurring Expenditure 1.84 79.70 81.54
5. Construction Activities    
i) M&R of Buildings 1.30 80.65 81.95
ii) Construction of Buildings -- 957.35 957.35
6. Total (1 to 5) 683.75 2369.83 3053.58
7. Provision for first two months of next
Financial year
90.85 167.32 258.17
8. Grand Total (6+7) 774.60 2537.15 3311.75
9. Less – Anticipated Internal Receipts (-) 26.10 (-) 6.10 (-) 32.20
10. Net Budgetary Support Requirement
                      (8 – 9)
748.50 2531.05 3279.55
 
8.4       The Committee feels that the Plan outlay of Rs.2, 000 crore supported by grant-in-aid of Rs.383.60 crore   under Non-plan
would not suffice even for the requirements in respect of the Vidyalayas established till the end of IX Plan, not to speak of any
new activity/expansion of JNVs. Therefore, there is an urgent need to enhance the Xth Plan outlay to enable JNVs to meet its
commitments without facing any serious financial crisis.  The Committee recommends that the case for more funds should be
strongly argued with the Planning Commission for this purpose.  The Committee hopes that the Planning Commission would also
take a positive view.
IX        CRITERIA FOR ADMISSION IN NAVODAYA VIDALAYAS
9.1       Admission to NVs is done on the basis of a Selection Test, for which a candidate has to fulfill the following eligibility
conditions: -
 

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
(a)    A candidate appearing for the Selection Test must be studying in Class V in a recognized school in that district where
he/she is seeking admission. Actual admission in Class VI is given subject to the condition of having passed Class V
before admission.
 
(b)   A candidate seeking admission must be between the age group 9-13 years on 1 st May of the year for which the Selection
Test is conducted.
 
(c)    A candidate must have studied and passed Class III, IV & V from recognized school/schools in the preceding three
continuous academic session for which the Selection Test is conducted spending one full academic session in each class
through the formal system of education, without any repetition of class, gap and/ or break in attendance.
 
(d)   A candidate who is not promoted to Class V before November of the preceding academic year, for which the test is
conducted, is not eligible to apply.
 
(e)    A candidate is not allowed second attempt to appear in the selection test under any circumstances.
 
(f)     A candidate seeking admission under the rural quota must have studied and passed III, IV & V from recognized school (s)
located in the rural areas.
 
            The above conditions are applicable to all the candidates irrespective to their caste or gender.  Efforts are made to ensure
that one-third of the total seats are filled up by girls.
 
9.2       The Samiti has given the following figures about the percentage of students belonging to SC/ST categories, girls and rural
areas in the Navodaya Vidayalayas, which is well above national norms (15% SC & 7.5% ST):
 
 SC
ST Girls Rural
2003-2004 23.90% 14.56% 34.01% 77.65%
 
 
9.3      The Committee appreciates the adequate representation of SCs, STs and girls in Navodaya Vidyalayas. It still feels that
there is scope for further increase in percentages of girls as well as students from rural areas. The Committee, however, expresses
its reservation about the eligibility condition requiring a rural candidate to pass class III, IV and V from recognized
school/schools, without any repetition of class, gap or break in attendance.  The Committee feels that it is not in consonance with
the ground realities and hardships faced in rural India. In villages, many times, parents are forced to take their children off the
school due to financial or personal reasons, resulting in break in studies. Consequently, many deserving children would stand
disqualified for the test.  The Committee feels that such restrictions for taking the test do not appear to be justified which might
deprive the poor children from getting quality education.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that this condition should be
reconsidered with a view to enabling those students who are talented, but are unable to afford continuous education. Such
students may be given remedial coaching, if need be.
 
9.4       During its study visits, the Committee was given to understand that admission process for NVs is a prolonged affair as the
admission tests are conducted in early May and the admission process is completed only by December.  However, the Samiti has
claimed that from the academic year 2001-2002 onwards, the system has been streamlined.  By and large, now the main admission
process is completed by July.  Only in case of new Vidyalayas, which are running in temporary accommodation, the admission
gets delayed mainly due to lack of necessary facilities.
 
9.5       The Committee recommends that all out efforts should be made to complete the admissions in time so that the studies of
children do not suffer.
 

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
9.6       During the course of discussions and also during visits, the Committee came to know about the problems being faced with
the State Governments in regard to the coordination of admission test as well issuing certificates of rural/urban, age, etc to the
children expeditiously by the District Administration.   The District Collector being the Chairman of the Vidyalaya Management
Committee is expected to overcome these difficulties.
 
9.7       The Committee recommends that the procedure as well as machinery for this purpose should be streamlined and sensitized
so that they could issue certificates to all the applicants after meticulously checking the details for rural/ urban areas, age etc.  The
Committee also recommends that the local MLA and President of concerned district Panchayat should also be included in the
Vidyalaya Management Committee.
 
X         PROBLEM OF DROPOUT
 
10.1     The Committee’s attention has been drawn towards the problem of drop-out in different classes of JNVs.  On a specific
query, various reasons were identified by the JNVs, which can be broadly classified as follows: -
-
                     medical ground, personal problem, family problem, transfer of parents to other station;
-                     non-eligibility of students for admission in science stream in class XI;
-                     Shifting to State Government Schools after passing class X for getting the benefit of State Quota in professional
courses.
-                     Unwillingness to move on migration in class IX.
 
10.2     The Committee was given to understand that the vacancies arising in classes upto VIII are not being filled up in view of
special identity of JNVs which are meant to provide quality education to children predominantly from rural areas.  Periodical
intake of students against the vacancies would create two types of children – those who have already adjusted to the system and
the newly admitted students not able to adapt themselves. Lateral entry is allowed only in class IX which is a stage when the
children are grown up, and special orientation programmes are conducted for them after their admission, with a view to bring
them on par with the regular students.
                  
10.3     The Committee is not inclined to accept this reasoning. The Committee is of the opinion that vacancies, if continued for a
long time, do result in wastage of scarce resources. It also results in denial of opportunity to students who badly need quality
education.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts be made for filling the seats at first opportunity. Preference to girl
students of the area may be given in filling these vacant seats, as their adaptability to any situation is more than the boys. 
Regional offices of NVS may be empowered to fill up those vacancies under intimation to the headquarters.
 
10.4     The Committee notes with serious concern the tendency of most of the NV students, particularly in Maharashtra,
Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh leaving the school after class X to join schools run by State Governments with a view to get the
benefit of State quota in professional courses. The Committee finds that the percentage of students leaving the Vidyalayas after
class X in some of the states like Andhra Pradesh (43.75%) Karnataka (37.68%) and Maharashtra (45.91%) is very high.
           
10.5     The Committee was informed that the possibility of giving the option to the students to choose either CBSE or State Board
was explored by the Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti and the matter was taken up with the CBSE also. The CBSE, however, has not
agreed for the affiliation from both the Boards. The matter was also referred for further review to the Expert Committee
nominated by the Government for review of Management Structure and Operation Mechanism of JNVs which has given the
following recommendation:-
“The possibility of some or all Navodaya Vidyalayas offering affiliation both to the State Board and Central Board
simultaneously has been considered and has been found to be devoid of merit.  It is felt that such dual affiliation will
seriously undermine the concept of national identity and national uniformity in regard to teaching and learning in

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
Navodaya Vidyalayas.  Dual affiliation will also pose problem about the medium of instruction and it is likely to require
additional teachers”.
 
10.6     The Committee notes that while the students of Kendriya Vidyalayas in states like Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu have
the options to choose between CBSE and State Boards, this facility of dual affiliation is not available in Navodaya Vidyalayas. 
The Committee also notes the concerns expressed by the Expert Committee nominated by the Government, which has been
quoted above.  The only concern of the Committee is that selective application of the principle of dual affiliation between KVS
and JNVs seems to be controversial.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that this issue should be reviewed by the
Department at the earliest with a view to have uniform policy in this regard.
 
XI        FUTURE PROSPECTS OF NV STUDENTS
 
11.1     Every Navodaya Vidayalaya has a Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Principal with Vice-Principal, four
teachers and three from Parent Teachers’ Council, to monitor the career guidance to the students. The Librarian of the Vidyalaya
collects all the data and information related to various career options. The Headquarters and Regional Offices also periodically
inform students about various courses and other career guidance information.
 
11.2     The Committee opines that outside agencies should also be roped in for specialized counselling on the career options
available, both inside as well as outside the country. There should also be counselling on various financial options available in the
form of study loans/assistanceships provided by the banks and other bodies. The students should also be taken out on study visits
to premier institutes of education like IIT, IIMs, and IISC etc. for an exposure to the academic/professional atmosphere so that
they also get motivated to set their respective goals and seriously endeavour to achieve such goals.
 
11.3     The Committee is also of the view that vocational education should be introduced in the JNVs.  Besides, Information
Technology, Computers, Engineering Drawing courses should also be introduced in NVs with a view to provide more
professional and career oriented options to the students.
 
11.4     The Committee was informed that a system has been developed by NVS to keep continuous rapport with the ex-students. 
Third December of every year is declared as Alumni Day. While it may be very difficult to keep track of all the students, efforts
are made to obtain information about as many students as possible.
 
11.5     The Committee notes that comparative analysis of details related to placement of students passing out from NVs for the
three years 2000-2001, 2001-2002 and 2002-2003 in respect of some of the regions as indicated below provide very surprising
information:
 
 
2000-2001
Region
IIT + Engineering Medical State Civil Services/Police
Bhopal 44 30 0
Hyderabad - 97 0
Shillong 24 13 0
Lucknow 106 36 0
2001-2002    
Bhopal 75 29 0
Hyderabad 100 139 0
Shillong 10 10 0
Lucknow 80 35 0
2002-2003   State Civil Services/ Police services

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
/others
Bhopal 233 114 6
Hyderabad 1641 571 119
Shillong 97 48 5
Lucknow 22 8 0
 
 
11.6     Figures relating to Bhopal and Hyderabad region appear to be disproportionately high.  Shillong region being a smaller
area and educationally not so developed also shows higher figures.   The Committee would also like to point out that percentage
of students leaving NVs after Class X in Andhra Pradesh (43.75%) being very high, figures relating to Hyderabad region
particularly for 2002-2003 do not seem to be accurate.    In contrast, figures in respect of students of Lucknow region show a
declining trend.  These figures, the Committee feels, need a second look.   The system for collecting the information regarding
placement of its students by the NVS needs to be streamlined. 
 
XII      SPORTS ACTIVITIES
 
12.1     The Committee was informed that regular participation in physical exercises and sports is compulsory for all the JNV
students.  In addition to that, sports and games are organised daily in the specified periods.  Tournaments are conducted at cluster,
regional and national levels.  The selected teams also participate in State Games Federation of India tournaments.  The children
are also encouraged to participate in various other tournaments sponsored by concerned sports federations, Sports Council, rural
tournaments etc.
 
12.2     The Committee appreciates the achievements made by students of JNVs during 2004 in Sports tournaments/Meets like
SGFI Archery Tournament, A & N State Games and Sports Meet, 2004; Tata-Telecom Inter school Athletes Meet and Indian
Rural National Archery Meet.  The Committee would, however, like to point out that efforts are also required to be made for
provision of adequate sports facilities in 117 JNVs functioning at temporary sites and also for all those JNVs having less than 30
acre of area.   Students studying at these JNVs should get the same exposure to sports as being provided at JNVs operating from
permanent sites/having prescribed area at their disposal.
 
XIII     HOSTEL FACILITY
 
13.1     The Committee notes that out of 485 JNVs functioning as on 31.8.04, 368 JNVs are functioning in permanent site and 117
JNVs are functioning at temporary sites.  The Committee presumes that all 368 JNVs functioning in permanent site must be
having hostel facilities.  If that be so, the Committee is surprised to note that out of 339 posts of Matron sanctioned as on 30.6.04,
only 36 were in place.  In Bhopal, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Lucknow and Pune regions, not even one post of Matron has been filled up.
The Committee is unable to understand how the hostels can function properly without Matron.
 
13.2     The Committee was given to understand that teachers are also entrusted with the responsibility of supervising the hostels. 
The Vidyalayas being residential schools, a great deal of regular support in terms of care, counseling, guidance and emotional
attachment is to be developed among the students.  The parental care, which is otherwise not available, is to be provided by the
teachers.  In view of this, the hostel supervision is at time entrusted to the teachers.  The Committee is, not inclined to agree with
this approach. Engaging teachers for Matron’s job, the Committee is of the view, could be only a stopgap arrangement.  Teachers
are already over-burdened with their present assignment of teaching.  They can, at best, help the matron in smooth running of the
hostels.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that recruitment for the post of matron should be expedited within a stipulated
time frame.

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
 
13.3     The Committee was informed that in the Vidyalayas located in interior areas, great deal of arrangements are to be made for
the safety and security of the children.  The compound wall is constructed and two Watchmen are posted.  The Principal is
provided with necessary funds for regular maintenance and repairs and also for other safety and security measures
 
13.4     The Committee emphasizes the need for ensuring safety and security of students particularly that of the girls living in the
hostels.  Security threat differs from region to region, and therefore Principals should be authorised to decide the scale of security
arrangements in a particular Vidyalaya. The Committee also emphasises the need for providing proper lighting and fencing
around the schools to avoid any untoward incident.
 
13.5     On a specific query, the Committee was informed that an amount of Rs.555/- per month per students is spent on an
average for mess facilities.  A Mess Committee under the Principal having the representatives of students and teachers, plans and
monitors the mess facilities.  The quality of the food is also discussed in the Parent Teachers Councils held every month.    The
Mess Committee prepares an advance plan including the menu.  It is also exhibited on the notice board.  The student members of
the Committee also ensure the quality of food supplied to them.  The teachers are provided with free boarding facility for which
funds are released on par with per student expenditure.
 
13.6     The Committee was informed that the present strength of regular staff for mess was not sufficient and affairs were
managed mostly by persons on daily wages. As per the information made available to the Committee, following is the sanctioned
and vacant posts of various functionaries required for providing mess facilities to students:-
 
Post Sanctioned In Position Vacant
Catering Assistant 411 368 43
Cook 484 314 175
Store Keeper 360 229 131
 
13.7    The Committee observes that in Bhopal, Jaipur, Pune and Shillong Regions, on an average about half the sanctioned posts
are filled up.  The Committee can understand the problem in getting the services of required personnel for mess facilities in hard
stations.  However, shortage of such staff in regions like Pune, Bhopal and Jaipur does not seem to be justified.  The Committee
recommends that NVS should initiate a special drive for filling up all the sanctioned posts for hostels of JNVs at the earliest.  If
any changes are required to be made in the recruitment procedure, steps may also be taken in this regard.
 
13.8     The Committee is of the view that the amount of Rs. 555/- per month which comes to less than Rs. 20/- per day can not be
considered sufficient to provide good and nutritious food to the students. The Committee strongly feels that it should be suitably
increased.  The Committee also recommends that the services of Food & Nutrition Board should be taken to provide nutritious
food to the students required for their proper growth.
 
XIV    MEDICAL FACILITIES AT JNVs
 
14.1     The Navodaya schools have a regular Staff Nurse attending to first-aid and emergencies and a part-time Doctor looking
after general health requirements of the students.  However, for serious health problems of the children, the Vidyalayas depend on
the services of nearby hospitals and primary health centres.  The District Medical Health Officer of the district is also one of the
members of the Vidyalaya Management Committee and provides assistance of general nature.
 
14.2     The Committee is of the view that a part time doctor managing around 550-600 students that too in a residential school in

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
rural and remote areas, is not a convincing proposition.   Periodical health check-up of students should be carried out and a health
card be prepared for every one of them.   Efforts should be made for making adequate first-aid facilities in each school to meet the
emergency health care requirements of the boarders.
 
XV TEACHERS
15.1     The Committee was informed that against sanctioned posts of 2972 PGT Teachers as on 30.6.04, 2550 posts were filled up
and 422 posts were vacant.  Similarly, out of 6681 sanctioned posts of TGT and Miscellaneous Category Teachers, 5876 posts
were filled up and there were 805 vacancies.
 
15.2     On a specific query about the efforts made by NVS for filling up the vacancies, the Committee was informed that the
Samiti had conducted a recruitment drive during June, 2004 on the basis of which offers of appointment were sent to 331
candidates for appointment as Post Graduate Teachers.  Offers could not be sent in 11 cases due to non-availability of suitable ST
candidates. Remaining 80 vacancies in the grade of PGT were to be filled by promotion by October, 2004. As regards 805
vacancies of TGTs, offers of appointment had been sent to 437 candidates selected during recent recruitment drive. 265 posts of
TGT posts were, however, still vacant.
 
15.3     Reasons for not filling up the vacancies as informed to the Committee were the following: -
1)
      New posts arise every year at the starting of new academic session due to upgradation of Vidyalayas from Secondary level
to Senior Secondary level.
2)      Vacancies arise due to retirement/resignation of existing teachers.
3)      Vacancies arise due to promotion from TGTs to PGTs, PGTs to Vice-Principals.
4)      Vacancies exist due to non-availability of suitable candidates in the reserved categories.
 
15.4     All Regional Offices/Principals have been empowered to fill-up the vacancies of teachers from time to time on contract
basis so that studies of children are not hampered. The Committee was informed that 483 Teachers - 205 PGT and 278 TGT
Teachers were working on contract basis.
 
15.5     The Committee observes that maximum numbers of vacancies of teachers are in Bhopal, Chandigarh, Pune and Shillong
Regions.  The Committee also notes that maximum number of teachers working on contract basis – 165 and 83 teachers
respectively are in Chandigarh and Shillong Regions.  Subject-wise, maximum vacancies were in Biology i.e. 89 PGT posts and 
in English  112 TGT posts lying vacant.
 
15.6     The Committee understands that quite a few incentives are being given to all categories of employees including teachers
opting for “Hard Stations”. However, the Committee is constrained to observe that these initiatives do not seem to be having the
desired results as maximum number of vacancies of both PGT and TGT Teachers are in Chandigarh and Shillong Regions
whereunder maximum number of hard stations fall.  Not only this, maximum number of teachers serving on contract basis are
posted in these two Regions only.
 
15.7     The Committee feels that the vacancies in the teaching staff adversely affects the overall performance of Navodaya
Vidyalayas. as the academic activities in schools get seriously hampered. The Committee is of the view that there is an urgent
need for reviewing the recruitment procedure of teaching staff. The Committee, also, recommends that the vacancies of teachers
in Navodaya Vidyalayas should be anticipated quite in advance and efforts should be made to complete the process of
appointments well before the start of next academic session.

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
 
15.8     Although the concept of appointing teachers on contract basis is a practical and need-based idea, however, the Committee
has reservations about performance and accountability of these teachers.  The Committee opines that the performance of teachers
appointed on contract basis should be reviewed regularly who may be relieved, if found wanting.
 
XVI     THREE LANGUAGE FORMULA
 
16.1     The scheme of Navodaya Vidyalayas provides for implementation of the Three Language Formula. The third language
taught in Hindi speaking districts is linked with the migration of students. All Navodaya Vidyalayas follow the Three Language
Formula i.e. one regional language, Hindi and English.
 
16.2     The Committee was informed that under the migration policy, 30% of IX class students of non-Hindi speaking districts
migrate to Hindi speaking districts and vice-versa for one year. The Committee was informed that the language teachers were
available in all the regional languages, except Assamese, Manipuri & Punjabi.  However, efforts have been made to post at least
one teacher in a particular school where the third language exists.  If the concerned language teacher is not available, the Regional
Officers/Principals of non-Hindi speaking States appoint teachers on contract basis and send them to schools where the children
are migrated. When the rotational transfer policy for regional language teachers was implemented, some of the teachers of
southern states approached the Courts and got the stay.  The Samiti has won the cases in Courts of Hyderabad, Bangalore and
Bombay.   In case of the Court at Ernakulam the case is pending for decision. As per the Rotational Policy of the Samiti, the 3
rd
Language (Regional Language teachers) teachers are transferred on completion of 5 years services in the Region of their initial
posting to a different region on a rotational transfer basis.
 
16.3     The Committee finds that there are a large number of vacancies of regional language teachers as indicated below:-
S. No. NAME OF 
THE
REGION
SANCTIONED POSITION VACANT
01. Bhopal 131 104 27
02. Chandigarh 74 58 16
03. Hyderabad 130 125 05
04. Jaipur 88 68 20
05. Lucknow 120 90 30
06. Patna 91 61 30
07.   Pune 86 83 03
08. Shillong 86 27 59
 TOTAL 806 616 190
 
 
16.4     The Committee notes that 25% vacancies of regional language teachers reflect the extent to which the regional languages
are being ignored.  The situation is more alarming in the North Eastern Region which needs to be brought more seriously into the
mainstream of our educational reforms in an acceptable mode of communication and which is possible only when we nurture the
regional languages properly.   The Committee thus opines that the posting of language teachers needs to be streamlined to ensure
a proper academic atmosphere throughout the year.  At the time of appointment of teachers, a clause may be added that rotational
transfers are a part of job and no request for stay of transfer will be entertained.

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
 
XVII    POSTING IN HARD STATIONS
17.1     With a view to motivate employees for accepting posting in Navodaya Vidyalayas located in North East Region and other
hard and difficult stations, as identified by the Samiti provides the following incentives:
 
a)
                  On completion of mandatory tenure Category-I employees will be posted to station of their choice. Choices in respect of
three NVs and one State will be obtained from them at the time of posting to NE Region. All possible efforts are made to
post them to one of the three NVs of their choice. In case that is not feasible on account of unavoidable reasons, at least the
State of their choice is assured even if it amounts to displacement of someone.
 
b)
                  Orders for posting outside the NE Region in respect of category-I employees will be issued two months before the
completion of mandatory tenure. However, in case such orders are not received even after two months of completion of
mandatory tenure, they shall stand relieved automatically and report for duty to the Regional Office having the jurisdiction
of State of their choice.
 
c)
                  Category-I employees will further be assured of posting of their choice in the NE Region from within the available
vacancies.
 
In fact all such conditions will be incorporated in the transfer order itself.
 
17.2        This scheme has been introduced in the Samiti w.e.f. academic year 2003-04. The teachers who have willingly accepted
posting to NE Region under these instructions, would be due for transfer out of hard and difficult stations only in the year 2006-07
after completing mandatory tenure of three years at these places.
 
17.3     The Committee was informed that there has been very significant response to the incentives given by the Samiti for the
employees opting hard and difficult stations including North East Region. During the year 2003-04 and 2004-05, 260 teachers
have willingly opted for posting to these stations and are continuing at present.
 
17.4        The Committee recommends that the NVS should ensure a more transparent transfer policy for teachers.  The teachers
should be posted at hard stations only on rotational basis and should be transferred soon after completing their tenure. The
transfers/postings should be effected in the beginning of the academic year and the process of relieving/joining should be
streamlined. The Government may also consider extending additional facilities and allowances to motivate more teachers to join
and stay back particularly in the areas like North East and Andaman & Nicobar Islands.
 
XVIII              PENSIONARY BENEFITS TO NVS EMPLOYEES
 
           
18.1     The Committee notes that the employees of NVs do not get pensionery benefits whereas employees of KVS, NCERT and
other similar autonomous organizations under the Department of Secondary and Higher Education enjoy the benefit of pension.
The Committee was informed thata proposal for introduction of pension scheme for the employees of the Samiti was referred to
the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure in July 1989 which did not support the proposal on the ground that the
pension provision would increase the expenditure of the Government as pension scheme is costlier than the Contributory
Provident Fund scheme.  Since then the proposal has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance at various levels on several
occasions but with no success.  The Ministry of Finance on different occasions advised the Samiti either to work out a suitable
annuity scheme through the Life Insurance Corporation based on voluntary contributions of the employees without any liability on
the Government or to consider opting for pension scheme notified by Ministry of Labour.  The Samiti had taken up this matter
with the Life Insurance Corporation but the schemes offered by LIC or the pension scheme notified by Ministry of Labour were

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
not accepted by the employees of the Samiti as they were not found comparable to the GPF/Pension Scheme in vogue in the
Government and other autonomous organizations.
 
18.2     Another initiativeat HRM level in 1998 was grounded down by the Ministry of Finance on the plea that there would be
similar demands from other autonomous organizations receiving grants-in-aid from the Government, which may be difficult to
resist. The Finance Ministry advanced the following reasons for rejecting the proposal: -
 
(a)    The cost of introduction of pension scheme is much higher than the CPF Scheme.  While CPF is an one-time
settlement, pension is a life-long commitment not only in respect of the pensioner but his family also.  The liability on
account of pension keeps on increasing with every increase/revision in pay/pensionary benefits on the basis of the
recommendations of the successive Pay Commissions, revision in the rates of dearness relief etc.  As most of the
autonomous organizations are fully funded through grants-in-aid received from the Government, Government’s
liability will increase to that extent if pension scheme is introduced.
 
(b)
   For servicing the pension scheme, a pension fund is required to be set up to be managed by a Trust.  Difficulties may
be experienced in judicious administration of the fund.
 
(c)    Under the Employees’ Provident Fund Act, the accretions to the Provident Fund are to be invested as per the pattern of
investment laid down by the Government.  With the formation of a Pension Fund, if accretions are invested elsewhere,
the Government will loose resources to that extent.
 
(d)
   In case the organization is wound up for one reason or the other, the Government may have to take over the entire
liability for pension.
 
 
18.3     The Committee takes note of the reservations of the Ministry of Finance in providing Pensionary benefit to employees of
NVS.   The Committee fails to comprehend the reasons for having different approach of mind for employees working in two
organisations doing similar work under a similar set up and conditions.   The Committee would like to point out when employees
of Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan can enjoy the pensionary benefits on their retirement, what deters the Government in providing
similar facility for employees of Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti, many of them away from their families serving in residential
schools located in rural areas.  The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that the position may be reviewed again and a decision
acceptable to employees of JNVs may be reached at the earliest.
 
XIV     TRAINING OF TEACHERS
 
19.1     Five Navodaya Leadership Institutes at Chandigarh, Ghaziabad, Ranga Reddy (Hyderabad), Guntur, Goa and Mangalore
were set up for meeting the training requirement of the teachers of NVs.  The Committee was informed that there is no regular
sanctioned staff for running the Navodaya Leadership Institutes (NLIs).  In order to ensure the effective running of these
Institutions, adequate staff is to be provided on regular basis.  A list of posts required for each of the NLI is as follows: -
 
 NAME OF THE POST NO. OF POSTS
1. Deputy Director 01
2. Assistant Director 02
3. Co-Ordinators/Principals 10
4. Administrative-cum-Accounts Officer 01
5. Instructor For Science promotion 01
6. Instructor For Work Experience 01
7. Computer Executive 01
8. Research & Publication Officer 01
9. Senior Librarian 01
10. Warden 01
11. Research & Publication Assistant 01
12. Computer Operator 01
13. Catering Assistant 01

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
14. Librarian 01
15. Assistants 02
16. Personal Assistant 01
17. Stenographers 04
18. UDC 01
19. Lab Assistant 01
20. LDCs/Store Keeper 03
21. Gestetner Operator 01
22. Drivers 02
23. Cook 01
24. Mess Helpers 02
25. Group ‘D’ Employees 08
 
19.2     At present, one officer from the existing staff is deputed to conduct the training courses in each of these institutions;
experts from the Samiti staff assist the institution to conduct Training Courses.  Outside experts are also deployed on honorarium
basis depending upon the nature of a course.
 
19.3     Training is an integral part of any organization. Training gives a chance of interacting with fellows of same profession and
gives them exposure to learn many new things. The Committee notes that the training aspect for NVS staff leaves much to be
desired.  There is not even sufficient number of trainers in training centres.  The Committee feels that training aspect is being
neglected badly.  Even the post of Directors, in the training institutes, was not approved and the Regional officers were entrusted
with the job to look after the training institutes. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should make urgent efforts for
strengthening and streamlining the process of training for the teachers by providing necessary infrastructure and manpower.
 
19.4     The Committee notes that utility of six training centres established in 2001-2002 was analysed by the Samiti in 2002-2003
and Mangalore Training Centre was closed.   The Committee finds that these training centres are not evenly spread covering all
parts of the country.   While two of the centres are located in Andhra Pradesh, no training centre has been set up in the North-
eastern region.  Northern region also does not seem to be adequately covered.   The Committee feels that these centres could have
been easily set up in the eight Regional Offices of NVS.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that feasibility of this option
may be explored.   If not found possible, steps may be taken for setting up a centre in N-E region.
 
XX       INSPECTION
 
20.1     The existing inspection programme of Navodaya Vidyalayas is operated in following three levels:-
(i)                  Inspection by Principal at Vidyalaya level
(ii)                Panel inspection by officers of Regional Office- cluster wise
(iii)               Inspection by officers of Samiti Headquarters/Region
 
20.2     Panel Inspection by the officers at regional levels is done with advance information.  Schedule and the names of the
officers are identified cluster wise and communicated to Principals beforehand.  Surprise inspection is also conducted to have on
the spot assessment of the functioning of the Navodaya Vidyalayas by the officers of Regional/NVS Hqrs.
20.3     The details of surprise inspections carried out in hard stations during the year 2002-2003 and 2003-2004 is as follows:-
 
YEAR
                        NO. OF VISITS
2002-2003                          34
2003-2004                           95
 
20.4     The Committee notes that despite so many surprise visits, there is no indication of any increase in the overall efficiency in
these schools. It is equally disturbing that no details about the outcome of these inspections was provided to the Committee. The

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
Committee also notes the difference in pattern of such visits as, schools in Jammu & Kashmir have been visited only once,
whereas Manipur has been inspected eight times.
 
20.5     The Committee recommends that there should be periodic inspection depending on the number of schools in these areas
and staff available for inspection. The guidelines for inspection should be circulated to all regional offices. Action taken on these
reports should also be checked periodically and as far as possible the local M.Ps may also be invited during the inspections to
have the benefit of their experiences.
 
20.6     The Committee is of the view that in because of JNVs being residential schools spread over different parts of the country,
monitoring mechanism through regular and surprise inspections followed by corrective action is essential for their smooth and
effective functioning. The Committee, however, feels that with the present set up in the Regional Offices, inspections are not
being carried out in the real sense.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department/NVS should take steps for
augmenting the required staff at all the Regional Offices.   The Committee would like to be apprised about the details of follow-up
action taken on the 95 surprise inspections carried out during 2003-2004.
 
XXI     REGIONAL OFFICES
 
21.1     The Samiti has eight Regional Offices located at Bhopal, Chandigarh, Hyderabad, Patna, Pune, Lucknow, Jaipur and
Shillong for administration of Vidyalayas under their respective regions. Out of these eight Regional Offices, only Regional
Office at Chandigarh is functioning in its own permanent building.  All other Regional Offices are functioning in rented
buildings.   The Committee was informed that the efforts of Samiti to acquire some suitable piece of land for construction of its
own Regional Office buildings through the State Government authorities have not evoked encouraging response.
 
21.2     The Committee notes with concern that the Regional Offices are functioning in rented buildings.  The Committee
recommends that concerted efforts with the concerned State Governments should be made to get suitable land so that Regional
Offices could be shifted to their own permanent buildings.  The Committee would like the Department to accord due importance
to the Regional Offices, which are instrumental in managing the affairs of the JNVs in that particular region more effectively and
efficiently.  The Ministry of HRD should take the lead and pursue the State Government, if possible at the Minister’s level. 
 
21.3     Each Regional Office has been provided with one Deputy Director, 5 Assistant Directors, 1 Accounts Officer and 2
Section Officers along with supporting secretariat staff.  For monitoring and supervision of construction of Vidyalaya buildings,
one Executive Engineer and one Junior Engineer has been provided to each Regional Office by internal adjustment.  This staff
pattern was approved by the Government during 1988-89 and there has been no increase in the staff strength thereafter. On the
contrary 10% of secretarial posts have been reduced under economy instructions of the Government.  
 
21.4     The Committee notes that in spite of expansion of JNVs from 2 Vidyalayas started in 1985-86 to 509 at present, the staff
strength at Regional Offices has not increased proportionately.  These eight Regional Offices with the meagre sanctioned staff
strength, functional strength may be even less, are supposed to supervise the functioning of 509 sanctioned NVs (485 NVs being
functional), many of them located in remote and inaccessible areas.   The Committee can well imagine the state of affairs.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends to have an O&M study done urgently for the evaluation of the work & staff in ROs, so that the
requisite number of posts could be created for smooth functioning of NVs.
 
XXII    GRIEVANCES REDRESSAL

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
 
22.1     The Committee was informed that there is a Grievance Cell in Samiti’s Headquarters.  The Joint Director (Academics) is
the Director of Staff and Public Grievances.  Petitions on grievances from public and staff related to the sanction of Vidyalayas,
admission in the Vidyalayas, problems in the Vidyalayas and service matters of the employees are received in the Cell.  During
the year 2003-2004, a total number of 42 cases were received out of which 22 cases have already been settled and the remaining
20 cases are under process of settlement.
 
22.2     The Committee is not satisfied with the functioning of the grievance redressal mechanism in NVs and feels that if teachers
grievances were not attended to in time, they will not be able to concentrate on teaching.  The Committee recommends that all the
Regional Offices should have a Grievance Cell so that the cases are attended to and disposed off quickly.  The principals should
also endeavour to get the matter sorted out early in consultation with the Regional Offices. The aggrieved person should also have
easy access to the officers. For this, a day in a week may be fixed enabling them to meet the officials.  The Teacher's Association
should also be encouraged to participate in the decision making process of the Samiti.  
 
XXIII    NON ACCEPTANCE OF THE SCHEME OF NAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS
 
23.1     The State of Tamil Nadu has not accepted the NV scheme so far due to the following reservations:-
 
(a)
    The Government of Tamil Nadu is committed to two languages formula to which Navodaya Scheme is a
contradiction.
 
(b)   The Navodaya Vidyalayas will go to serve only the elite in the society.
 
(c ) Even though Navodaya Vidyalayas are opened in rural areas, the percentage of students benefited will be as low as
0.5% and will only create heart burning among the remaining majority who will not get opportunity.
 
(d) It is not worthwhile to fritter away scarce resources when there is a large              requirement to establish infrastructure
for primary education.
 
23.2     According to the State Government of Tamil Nadu the scheme of Navodaya Vidyalayas may be reconsidered and the
resources thus saved may be placed at the disposal of the States to provide basic minimum services in primary education for the
poor and the under privileged in the rural areas.
 
23.3     The Committee is not convinced by the arguments of the State Government mainly because the JNVs are catering to the
educational needs of meritorious students from the poor and deprived sections of the society, with special emphasis on the girl
students.  The three language formula adopted by the JNVs needs to be encouraged by all the State Government as an element of
national integration.  The Government should, therefore convince and persuade the State Government on these broad objectives to
adopt the schemes of JNVs.
           
XXIV  PROBLEMS BEING FACED IN RUNNING THE JNVS
24.1     The following problems were placed before the Committee in operating the NV schools: -
(a)      Non-transfer of land
(b)      Telephone connectivity.
(c)      Shortage of ground water.
(d)      Lack of road transport and communication.
(e)      Lack of regular supply of electricity.
(f)       Assistance in procuring rations and civil supplies.
 
24.2     The Committee feels that most of these problems can be solved with proper coordination and support from the State
Governments.  Since the Navodaya Vidyalayas do not have financial provision for laying connecting roads, electrical lines, and

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
levelling the lines, etc., the State Govt. should be requested to periodically monitor the support given to the Vidyalayas and ensure
that the minimum infrastructural facilities are extended uninterruptedly.  District Magistrate being actually associated in all such
issues  can take lead in  getting these problems redressed quickly.
 
XXV    SURVEY OF JNVs
 
25.1
          The Navodaya Vidyalaya System is a unique experiment in the annals of school education in India.  Its significance lies in
the selection of talented rural children to provide them with quality education comparable to the best, in a residential schools
system irrespective of their capacity to pay for it. Scheme of Navodaya Vidyalayas started in 1985-86 now covers almost all parts
of the country.   Over the years, these Vidyalayas have played a major role in providing qualify school education with special
focus on students from rural background.  
 
25.2
          The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for conducting a survey of all the JNVs so as to assess the shortfall in
required infrastructure, condition of school/hostel buildings, availability/non-availability of proper hostel facilities in all respects.  
Such a survey should also cover the student intake capacity and present student strength alongwith the required and present
strength of teachers/non-teachers (Vidyalaya-wise), need for relocating some Vidyalayas in view of optimum utilisation not being
there.   The   Committee would emphasize that status of Vidyalayas operating from both permanent and temporary site should be
reflected separately.   Only then the factual position would emerge.  Findings of such a survey and also Committee's
recommendations/observations on various aspects of functioning of JNVs should lead to corrective action by JNVs/Department.
 
 
 
-----------
 
OBSERVATONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
 
III        NORMS FOR OPENING OF NAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS 
 
            The Committee was given to understand that out of 509 sanctioned JNVs, 485 JNVs are functional.  Out of the remaining
24 non-functional JNVs, 9 have been sanctioned only during the years 2003-04 and 2004-2005 and are likely to start functioning
from the next academic year.  The Committee is, however, constrained to note that out of the remaining 15 non-functional JNVs,
three JNVs, one each in Bihar, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh were sanctioned in 2001-2002, ten JNVs, one each in Gujarat,
Haryana, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Tripura, UP and Uttaranchal and two in Mizoram were sanctioned in 2002-2003.  In
all these cases, temporary accommodation has not been made available by the concerned State Governments so far.  The
Committee fails to understand the reasons behind the inability of the State Governments in fulfilling the minimum requirements
for proposals initiated by them. The Committee observes that majority of these districts are located in remote and tribal areas
where JNVs are primarily required to be opened. The Committee is particularly disturbed by the situation in Mizoram. The
Committee finds that out of the six JNVs sanctioned in Mizoram, two JNVs opened – one in 1987-1988 in Lungli District and the
other in Chimtupui District in 1992-93 had to be closed down due to less enrolment and administrative reasons. In respect of three
JNVs sanctioned in 2002-2003, temporary accommodation is yet to be made available.  At present, only one JNV is functional.
The remaining two districts of the State are yet to be covered. The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need for the
Department for taking up such cases at the highest level.  The Committee feels that given the peculiar geographical location and
the overall backwardness of the North-East region, the Central Government should make special efforts on meeting all the
requirements to make JNVs functional at the earliest. (Para 3.2)
 
            The Committee recommends that concerted efforts should be made to expedite not only the sanctioning of all the 574
JNVs, but also to make them functional in a time bound manner. The Committee would like the Ministry to play the role of a
facilitator in clearing the proposals received as well as in encouraging other proposals to be put up for opening new schools in the

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
remaining districts. (Para 3.3)
 
            The Committee, however, finds that civil construction in the schools was generally running much behind the schedule,
because of one reason or the other.  Apart from non-availability of funds in time, the Committee found that long procedures and
lack of proper coordination between different agencies involved in the exercise were responsible for such delays resulting in time
and cost over-run, which must be avoided.  The Committee strongly feels that there should be a mechanism at central level
working in co-ordination with all concerned state authorities which would constantly monitor all such cases as per time bound
action plan. The Committee would also like the Ministry to prepare a consolidated estimate required for construction of pending
buildings and plead strongly for that fund with the Ministry of Finance. (Para 3.5)
 
            The Committee was informed that 104 JNVs are located in less than 30 acres of land, { with the minimum area of land
(9.5 acres)  in JNV Bhadoi district, UP } out of which maximum number of 29 JNVs are located in Chandigarh region; as many as
26 JNVs do not have any play field; and most of the JNVs in J&K are not having even a permanent school building. The
Committee appreciates the compulsions to relax the condition of 30 acres of land in selective cases where land is scarce. 
However, the Committee recommends that the relaxation should be granted only after carefully examining the interests of the
students and their development.  For example, the paucity of land should not be a constraint for games & sports facilities and for
this the sports facilities available in nearby schools, institutions, clubs etc, could be shared so that the students are not deprived of
their educational and developments needs.  The Committee would also emphasise that all efforts should be made to provide
required facilities in JNVs   which can be made available in less than 30 acres of land area at the earliest. (Para 3.7)
 
IV        INFRASTRUCTURE
 
4.3       The Committee was given to understand that out of 485 functional JNVs as on 31.8.2004, 368 JNVs are functioning in
permanent site.  The Committee, however, observes that out of these 368 JNVs, 104 are having land area less than the prescribed
areas of 30 acres.  And out of these JNVs, 11 JNVs are having less than 18 acres, 9 JNVs are having temporary buildings,
situation is really bad in J&K as out of 13 JNVs, 4 are running in S.P. sheds and 1 in temporary building.  The Committee is not
satisfied about the buildings and infrastructure available in the remaining JNVs in the state, as exact details have not been made
known to the Committee. Actual status of buildings and infrastructure of JNVs in Chandigarh, Hyderabad and Jaipur Region has
also not been made available to the Committee.  The Committee apprehends that these JNVs must be in a bad state, totally lacking
the minimum requirements.  The Committee is also not aware about the status of JNVs having 30 acres of land and functioning
from permanent sites.  The Committee feels that JNVs functioning from permanent site does not seem to make much difference. 
The Committee wonders about the factors delaying the provision of required infrastructure once land is made available.  The
Committee recommends that all JNVs having permanent site should be provided required buildings and infrastructure without any
delay.  The Committee strongly feels that an effective monitoring mechanism should be evolved for accomplishing this over
delayed task.  The Department/NVS should work out a time bound action plan in this regard in active coordination with Regional
Offices, State authorities and district administration.  Funds as and when required should be provided for this purpose but on the
condition that all works are implemented at the earliest. (Para 4.3)
 
            The Committee further recommends that apart from providing the requisite basic infrastructure, provision for fire safety
should also be made on priority basis to make the buildings safer. Regular inspections should be made to see that buildings etc
were properly maintained.  The school authorities should also discuss the problem of maintenance of building in the Parents
Teachers Meetings, so that the local authorities could be pressurized to do the job. (Para 4.4)
 
V         STUDENT INTAKE
 
Some of the state-wise figures are a cause for serious concern. The Committee apprehends that school-wise position would be

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
even more damaging. The Committee fails to understand the factors responsible for overall student intake in JNVs remaining
much below the prescribed limit.  Either JNVs have failed to attract students or adequate infrastructure for required student
capacity is not there.  Both the situations are very discouraging.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should take steps for conducting a survey for analyzing the reasons for low intake of student in JNVs with particular focus on the
JNVs having very low figures and based on the findings of the survey, take remedial action.  The Committee feels that except
under unavoidable circumstances, the seats must not be allowed to remain vacant.  The Committee opines that a merit list of all
the students aspiring for the admission may be prepared and the vacancies, if any, may be filled up from amongst the candidates in
the list after relaxing the qualifying forms.  The candidates belonging to weaker section of the society should be given preference
while filling up such vacancies. (Para 5.1)
 
VI        COMPUTER EDUCATION IN NAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS
 
6.2       The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Samiti in the field of Computer education.  It, however, notices that
a large number of schools were yet to have this facility. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the JNVs should be
covered under this scheme at the earliest. The Committee opines that the maintenance and connectivity with Internet should be
ensured to get optimum utilization of computers.  The Committee recommends that all the teachers should be encouraged and
suitably trained to work on computers. (Para 6.2)
 
VII      SMART SCHOOLS SCHEME
 
7.2       The Committee recommends that more Vidyalayas may be covered under the scheme.  Local M.P. and MLA can be
associated for extending funds to such Vidyalayas for purchasing computers. (Para 7.2)
 
VIII     FUNDING
            The Committee feels that the Plan outlay of Rs.2, 000 crore supported by grant-in-aid of Rs.383.60 crore   under Non-plan
would not suffice even for the requirements in respect of the Vidyalayas established till the end of IX Plan, not to speak of any
new activity/expansion of JNVs. Therefore, there is an urgent need to enhance the Xth Plan outlay to enable JNVs to meet its
commitments without facing any serious financial crisis.  The Committee recommends that the case for more funds should be
strongly argued with the Planning Commission for this purpose.  The Committee hopes that the Planning Commission would also
take a positive view. (Para 8.4)
IX        CRITERIA FOR ADMISSION IN NAVODAYA VIDALAYAS
 
           The Committee appreciates the adequate representation of SCs, STs and girls in Navodaya Vidyalayas. It still feels that
there is scope for further increase in percentages of girls as well as students from rural areas. The Committee, however, expresses
its reservation about the eligibility condition requiring a rural candidate to pass class III, IV and V from recognized
school/schools, without any repetition of class, gap or break in attendance.  The Committee feels that it is not in consonance with
the ground realities and hardships faced in rural India. In villages, many times, parents are forced to take their children off the
school due to financial or personal reasons, resulting in break in studies. Consequently, many deserving children would stand
disqualified for the test.  The Committee feels that such restrictions for taking the test do not appear to be justified which might
deprive the poor children from getting quality education.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that this condition should be
reconsidered with a view to enabling those students who are talented, but are unable to afford continuous education. Such
students may be given remedial coaching, if need be. (Para 9.3)
 

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
           The Committee recommends that all out efforts should be made to complete the admissions in time so that the studies of
children do not suffer. (Para 9.5)
 
           The Committee recommends that the procedure as well as machinery for this purpose should be streamlined and sensitized
so that they could issue certificates to all the applicants after meticulously checking the details for rural/ urban areas, age etc.  The
Committee also recommends that the local MLA and President of concerned district Panchayat should also be included in the
Vidyalaya Management Committee. (Para 9.7)
 
X         PROBLEM OF DROPOUT
 
            The Committee is not inclined to accept this reasoning. The Committee is of the opinion that vacancies, if continued for a
long time, do result in wastage of scarce resources. It also results in denial of opportunity to students who badly need quality
education.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts be made for filling the seats at first opportunity. Preference to girl
students of the area may be given in filling these vacant seats, as their adaptability to any situation is more than the boys. 
Regional offices of NVS may be empowered to fill up those vacancies under intimation to the headquarters.  (Para 10.3)
 
            The Committee notes that while the students of Kendriya Vidyalayas in states like Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu have
the options to choose between CBSE and State Boards, this facility of dual affiliation is not available in Navodaya Vidyalayas. 
The Committee also notes the concerns expressed by the Expert Committee nominated by the Government, which has been
quoted above.  The only concern of the Committee is that selective application of the principle of dual affiliation between KVS
and JNVs seems to be controversial.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that this issue should be reviewed by the
Department at the earliest with a view to have uniform policy in this regard. (Para 10.6)
 
XI        FUTURE PROSPECTS OF NV STUDENTS
 
11.2     The Committee opines that outside agencies should also be roped in for specialized counselling on the career options
available, both inside as well as outside the country. There should also be counselling on various financial options available in the
form of study loans/assistanceships provided by the banks and other bodies. The students should also be taken out on study visits
to premier institutes of education like IIT, IIMs, and IISC etc. for an exposure to the academic/professional atmosphere so that
they also get motivated to set their respective goals and seriously endeavour to achieve such goals. (Para 11.2)
 
            The Committee is also of the view that vocational education should be introduced in the JNVs.  Besides, Information
Technology, Computers, Engineering Drawing courses should also be introduced in NVs with a view to provide more
professional and career oriented options to the students. (Para 11.3)
 
 
            Figures relating to Bhopal and Hyderabad region appear to be disproportionately high.  Shillong region being a smaller
area and educationally not so developed also shows higher figures.   The Committee would also like to point out that percentage
of students leaving NVs after Class X in Andhra Pradesh (43.75%) being very high, figures relating to Hyderabad region
particularly for 2002-2003 do not seem to be accurate.    In contrast, figures in respect of students of Lucknow region show a
declining trend.  These figures, the Committee feels, need a second look.   The system for collecting the information regarding
placement of its students by the NVS needs to be streamlined.  (Para 11.6)
 
XII      SPORTS ACTIVITIES

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
 
            The Committee would, however, like to point out that efforts are also required to be made for provision of adequate sports
facilities in 117 JNVs functioning at temporary sites and also for all those JNVs having less than 30 acre of area.   Students
studying at these JNVs should get the same exposure to sports as being provided at JNVs operating from permanent sites/having
prescribed area at their disposal. (Para 12.2)
 
XIII     HOSTEL FACILITY
 
            The Committee notes that out of 485 JNVs functioning as on 31.8.04, 368 JNVs are functioning in permanent site and 117
JNVs are functioning at temporary sites.  The Committee presumes that all 368 JNVs functioning in permanent site must be
having hostel facilities.  If that be so, the Committee is surprised to note that out of 339 posts of Matron sanctioned as on 30.6.04,
only 36 were in place.  In Bhopal, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Lucknow and Pune regions, not even one post of Matron has been filled up.
The Committee is unable to understand how the hostels can function properly without Matron. (Para 13.1)
 
            The Committee was given to understand that teachers are also entrusted with the responsibility of supervising the hostels. 
The Vidyalayas being residential schools, a great deal of regular support in terms of care, counseling, guidance and emotional
attachment is to be developed among the students.  The parental care, which is otherwise not available, is to be provided by the
teachers.  In view of this, the hostel supervision is at time entrusted to the teachers.  The Committee is, not inclined to agree with
this approach. Engaging teachers for Matron’s job, the Committee is of the view, could be only a stopgap arrangement.  Teachers
are already over-burdened with their present assignment of teaching.  They can, at best, help the matron in smooth running of the
hostels.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that recruitment for the post of matron should be expedited within a stipulated
time frame. (Para 13.2)
 
            The Committee emphasizes the need for ensuring safety and security of students particularly that of the girls living in the
hostels.  Security threat differs from region to region, and therefore Principals should be authorised to decide the scale of security
arrangements in a particular Vidyalaya. The Committee also emphasises the need for providing proper lighting and fencing
around the schools to avoid any untoward incident. (Para 13.4)
 
            The Committee was informed that the present strength of regular staff for mess was not sufficient and affairs were
managed mostly by persons on daily wages. As per the information made available to the Committee, following is the sanctioned
and vacant posts of various functionaries required for providing mess facilities to students:-
 
Post Sanctioned In Position Vacant
Catering Assistant 411 368 43
Cook 484 314 175
Store Keeper 360 229 131
(Para 13.6)
 
            The Committee observes that in Bhopal, Jaipur, Pune and Shillong Regions, on an average about half the sanctioned posts
are filled up.  The Committee can understand the problem in getting the services of required personnel for mess facilities in hard
stations.  However, shortage of such staff in regions like Pune, Bhopal and Jaipur does not seem to be justified.  The Committee
recommends that NVS should initiate a special drive for filling up all the sanctioned posts for hostels of JNVs at the earliest.  If
any changes are required to be made in the recruitment procedure, steps may also be taken in this regard. (Para 13.7)

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
             The Committee is of the view that the amount of Rs. 555/- per month which comes to less than Rs. 20/- per day can not be
considered sufficient to provide good and nutritious food to the students. The Committee strongly feels that it should be suitably
increased.  The Committee also recommends that the services of Food & Nutrition Board should be taken to provide nutritious
food to the students required for their proper growth. (Para 13.8)
 
XIV    MEDICAL FACILITIES AT JNVs
 
            The Committee is of the view that a part time doctor managing around 550-600 students that too in a residential school in
rural and remote areas, is not a convincing proposition.   Periodical health check-up of students should be carried out and a health
card be prepared for every one of them.   Efforts should be made for making adequate first-aid facilities in each school to meet the
emergency health care requirements of the boarders. (Para 14.2)
 
XV TEACHERS
            The Committee understands that quite a few incentives are being given to all categories of employees including teachers
opting for “Hard Stations”. However, the Committee is constrained to observe that these initiatives do not seem to be having the
desired results as maximum number of vacancies of both PGT and TGT Teachers are in Chandigarh and Shillong Regions
whereunder maximum number of hard stations fall.  Not only this, maximum number of teachers serving on contract basis are
posted in these two Regions only. (Para 15.6)
 
            The Committee feels that the vacancies in the teaching staff adversely affects the overall performance of Navodaya
Vidyalayas. as the academic activities in schools get seriously hampered. The Committee is of the view that there is an urgent
need for reviewing the recruitment procedure of teaching staff. The Committee, also, recommends that the vacancies of teachers
in Navodaya Vidyalayas should be anticipated quite in advance and efforts should be made to complete the process of
appointments well before the start of next academic session. (Para 15.7)
 
 
            Although the concept of appointing teachers on contract basis is a practical and need-based idea, however, the Committee
has reservations about performance and accountability of these teachers.  The Committee opines that the performance of teachers
appointed on contract basis should be reviewed regularly who may be relieved, if found wanting. (Para 15.8)
 
XVI     THREE LANGUAGE FORMULA
 
            The Committee notes that 25% vacancies of regional language teachers reflect the extent to which the regional languages
are being ignored.  The situation is more alarming in the North Eastern Region which needs to be brought more seriously into the
mainstream of our educational reforms in an acceptable mode of communication and which is possible only when we nurture the
regional languages properly.   The Committee thus opines that the posting of language teachers needs to be streamlined to ensure
a proper academic atmosphere throughout the year.  At the time of appointment of teachers, a clause may be added that rotational
transfers are a part of job and no request for stay of transfer will be entertained. (Para 16.4)
 
XVII    POSTING IN HARD STATIONS
 
               The Committee recommends that the NVS should ensure a more transparent transfer policy for teachers.  The teachers
should be posted at hard stations only on rotational basis and should be transferred soon after completing their tenure. The

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
transfers/postings should be effected in the beginning of the academic year and the process of relieving/joining should be
streamlined. The Government may also consider extending additional facilities and allowances to motivate more teachers to join
and stay back particularly in the areas like North East and Andaman & Nicobar Islands. (Para 17.4)
 
XVIII              PENSIONARY BENEFITS TO NVS EMPLOYEES
 
            The Committee takes note of the reservations of the Ministry of Finance in providing Pensionary benefit to employees of
NVS.   The Committee fails to comprehend the reasons for having different approach of mind for employees working in two
organisations doing similar work under a similar set up and conditions.   The Committee would like to point out when employees
of Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan can enjoy the pensionary benefits on their retirement, what deters the Government in providing
similar facility for employees of Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti, many of them away from their families serving in residential
schools located in rural areas.  The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that the position may be reviewed again and a decision
acceptable to employees of JNVs may be reached at the earliest. (Para 18.3)
 
XIV     TRAINING OF TEACHERS
 
            Training is an integral part of any organization. Training gives a chance of interacting with fellows of same profession and
gives them exposure to learn many new things.        The Committee notes that the training aspect for NVS staff leaves much to be
desired.  There is not even sufficient number of trainers in training centres.  The Committee feels that training aspect is being
neglected badly.  Even the post of Directors, in the training institutes, was not approved and the Regional officers were entrusted
with the job to look after the training institutes. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should make urgent efforts for
strengthening and streamlining the process of training for the teachers by providing necessary infrastructure and manpower. (Para
19.3)
 
            The Committee notes that utility of six training centres established in 2001-2002 was analysed by the Samiti in 2002-2003
and Mangalore Training Centre was closed.   The Committee finds that these training centres are not evenly spread covering all
parts of the country.   While two of the centres are located in Andhra Pradesh, no training centre has been set up in the North-
eastern region.  Northern region also does not seem to be adequately covered.   The Committee feels that these centres could have
been easily set up in the eight Regional Offices of NVS.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that feasibility of this option
may be explored.   If not found possible, steps may be taken for setting up a centre in N-E region. (Para 19.4)
XX       INSPECTION
            The Committee notes that despite so many surprise visits, there is no indication of any increase in the overall efficiency in
these schools. It is equally disturbing that no details about the outcome of these inspections was provided to the Committee. The
Committee also notes the difference in pattern of such visits as, schools in Jammu & Kashmir have been visited only once,
whereas Manipur has been inspected eight times. (Para 20.4)
 
            The Committee recommends that there should be periodic inspection depending on the number of schools in these areas
and staff available for inspection. The guidelines for inspection should be circulated to all regional offices. Action taken on these
reports should also be checked periodically and as far as possible the local M.Ps may also be invited during the inspections to
have the benefit of their experiences. (Para 20.5)
 
            The Committee is of the view that in because of JNVs being residential schools spread over different parts of the country,
monitoring mechanism through regular and surprise inspections followed by corrective action is essential for their smooth and
effective functioning. The Committee, however, feels that with the present set up in the Regional Offices, inspections are not

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
being carried out in the real sense.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department/NVS should take steps for
augmenting the required staff at all the Regional Offices.   The Committee would like to be apprised about the details of follow-up
action taken on the 95 surprise inspections carried out during 2003-2004.  (Para 20.6)
 
XXI     REGIONAL OFFICES
 
            The Committee notes with concern that the Regional Offices are functioning in rented buildings.  The Committee
recommends that concerted efforts with the concerned State Governments should be made to get suitable land so that Regional
Offices could be shifted to their own permanent buildings.  The Committee would like the Department to accord due importance
to the Regional Offices, which are instrumental in managing the affairs of the JNVs in that particular region more effectively and
efficiently.  The Ministry of HRD should take the lead and pursue the State Government, if possible at the Minister’s level.  (Para
21.2)
 
            The Committee notes that in spite of expansion of JNVs from 2 Vidyalayas started in 1985-86 to 509 at present, the staff
strength at Regional Offices has not increased proportionately.  These eight Regional Offices with the meagre sanctioned staff
strength, functional strength may be even less, are supposed to supervise the functioning of 509 sanctioned NVs (485 NVs being
functional), many of them located in remote and inaccessible areas.   The Committee can well imagine the state of affairs.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends to have an O&M study done urgently for the evaluation of the work & staff in ROs, so that the
requisite number of posts could be created for smooth functioning of NVs. (Para 21.4)
 
XXII    GRIEVANCES REDRESSAL
 
            The Committee is not satisfied with the functioning of the grievance redressal mechanism in NVs and feels that if teachers
grievances were not attended to in time, they will not be able to concentrate on teaching.  The Committee recommends that all the
Regional Offices should have a Grievance Cell so that the cases are attended to and disposed off quickly.  The principals should
also endeavour to get the matter sorted out early in consultation with the Regional Offices. The aggrieved person should also have
easy access to the officers. For this, a day in a week may be fixed enabling them to meet the officials.  The Teacher's Association
should also be encouraged to participate in the decision making process of the Samiti.  (Para 22.2)
 
XXIII    NON ACCEPTANCE OF THE SCHEME OF NAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS
 
 
23.3     The Committee is not convinced by the arguments of the State Government mainly because the JNVs are catering to the
educational needs of meritorious students from the poor and deprived sections of the society, with special emphasis on the girl
students.  The three language formula adopted by the JNVs needs to be encouraged by all the State Government as an element of
national integration.  The Government should, therefore convince and persuade the State Government on these broad objectives to
adopt the schemes of JNVs.  (Para 23.2)
           
XXIV  PROBLEMS BEING FACED IN RUNNING THE JNVS
24.2     The Committee feels that most of these problems can be solved with proper coordination and support from the State
Governments.  Since the Navodaya Vidyalayas do not have financial provision for laying connecting roads, electrical lines, and
levelling the lines, etc., the State Govt. should be requested to periodically monitor the support given to the Vidyalayas and ensure
that the minimum infrastructural facilities are extended uninterruptedly.  District Magistrate being actually associated in all such
issues  can take lead in  getting these problems redressed quickly. (Para 24.2)
 
XXV    SURVEY OF JNVs

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
 
25.3          The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for conducting a survey of all the JNVs so as to assess the shortfall in
required infrastructure, condition of school/hostel buildings, availability/non-availability of proper hostel facilities in all respects.  
Such a survey should also cover the student intake capacity and present student strength alongwith the required and present
strength of teachers/non-teachers (Vidyalaya-wise), need for relocating some Vidyalayas in view of optimum utilisation not being
there.   The   Committee would emphasize that status of Vidyalayas operating from both permanent and temporary site should be
reflected separately.   Only then the factual position would emerge.  Findings of such a survey and also Committee's
recommendations/observations on various aspects of functioning of JNVs should lead to corrective action by JNVs/Department.
(Para 25.3)
 
-----------
 
MINUTES
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 9
th September, 2004, in Committee Room  62 First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1. Shri Vayalar Ravi                      ¾        Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3. Shrimati Chandra Kala Pandey
4.
      Shri S. Anbalagan
5. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
6. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
 
LOK SABHA
 
7. Shri Basudeb Barman
8. Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
9. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
10. Shri Manjunath Kunnur
11. Shri Y.G. Mahajan
12. Shri Manoj Kumar
13. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
14. Dr. Thokchom Meinya
15. Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
16. Mohd. Mukim
17. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
18. Shri Tufani Saroj
19. Smt. P. Satheedevi
20. Shri A.R. Shaheen
21. Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
 

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SECONDARY AND HIGHER EDUCATION
 
1.         Shri S.P. Gaur                                      Joint Secretary (SE)
2.         Shri O.N. Singh                                    Director and Commissioner, NVS
3.         Shri Kamal Chowdhery                        DS (UT)
4.         Shri R. Jamuda                         Commissioner, KVS
5.         Smt. Pragya Richa Srivastava                Joint Commissioner
6.         Shri S. Jayaraman                                 Dy. Commissioner (Fin.), KVS
7.         Shri Ravindra Nath                               OSD (Acad), KVS
 
2.         x                      x                      x
 
3.         The Chairman informed the members that he had permitted the Joint Secretary Department of Secondary and Higher
Education to represent the Secretary, who was abroad to attend some official meeting. Thereafter, the Committee heard
Commissioners of Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti alongwith the Joint Secretary of the
Department of Secondary and Higher Education on the functioning of Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and Navodaya Vidyalaya
Samiti.  The Members sought clarifications from the officials of the Department, which were given.  A set of additional
questionnaire was also handed over to the Joint Secretary of the Department for sending replies to the Committee at the earliest.
4.         After hearing the witnesses, the Committee felt that it would be necessary to hear the Secretary of the Department
alongwith Commissioners of Kendriya and Navodaya Vidyalayas again on 22nd September, 2004.   The Committee also decided
to hear the Secretary of Department of Woman and Child Development on 23rd September, 2004 on the Gender Budget Analysis.
5.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
 
6.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 22 nd September and at 11.00
a.m. on Thursday, the 23rd September 2004.
 
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 10.30 a.m. on Thursday, the 23 rd September, 2004, in Committee Room 63, First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.                  Shri Vayalar Ravi                      ¾        Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.                  Shri Eduardo Faleiro
3.                  Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
4.                  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
5.                  Shrimati Chandra Kala Pandey
6.                  Shri S. Anbalagan
7.                  Shri Uday Pratap Singh
8.                  Shrimati Vanga Geetha
9.                  Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
LOK SABHA
10.              Shri Basudeb Barman
11.              Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
12.              Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
13.              Shri R. L. Jalappa
14.              Shri Ramswarup Koli
15.              Shri Manjunath Kunnur
16.              Shri Y.G. Mahajan

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
17.              Shri Manoj Kumar
18.              Shri Babu Lal Marandi
19.              Dr. Thokchom Meinya
20.              Mohd. Mukim
21.              Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
22.              Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
23.              Shri Tufani Saroj
24.              Smt. P. Satheedevi
25.              Shri A.R. Shaheen
26.              Smt. Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
27.              Shri K. Virupakshappa
28.              Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
 
WITNESSES
I.        x                                    x                                  x
           
II.        REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SECONDARY AND HIGHER EDUCATION
1.         Shri B.S. Baswan                                 Secretary
2.         Shri S.P. Gaur                                      Joint Secretary (SE)
3.         Shri O.N. Singh                                    Director and Commissioner, NVS
4.         Shri Kamal Chowdhery                        DS (UT)
5.         Shri R. Jamuda                         Commissioner, KVS
6.         Smt. Pragya Richa Srivastava                Joint Commissioner
7.         Shri S. Jayaraman                                 Dy. Commissioner (Fin.), KVS
8.         Shri Ravindra Nath                               OSD (Acad), KVS
 
2.         x                      x                      x 
3.         The witnesses then withdrew.
4.         The Committee, thereafter, heard the Secretary, Department of Secondary Education alongwith the Commissioners of
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti on the functioning of Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and
Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti. The members sought clarifications, which the Secretary and other representatives replied.
 5.        The witnesses then withdrew.
6.         A verbatim record of the entire proceeding was kept.
7.         x                      x                      x
8.         The Committee then adjourned at 2.20 p.m.
 
 
 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
xxx  relates to other matters.
 XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3:00 p.m. on Saturday, the 26
th February 2005, in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT

15th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/154threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:21:28]
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
1. Shri Vayalar Ravi                      ¾        Chairman
2. Shrimati Chandra Kala Pandey
3. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
4. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
 
LOK SABHA
 
5. Shri Basudeb Barman
6. Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
7. Shri Manjunath Kunnur
8. Shri Y.G. Mahajan
9. Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
10. Dr. Thokchom Meinya
11. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
12. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
13. Shri Tufani Saroj
14. Smt. P. Satheedevi
15. Shri A.R. Shaheen
16. Smt. Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
 
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer 
 
2.         The Committee took up for consideration the 154
th draft Report on 'Functioning of Navodaya Vidyalayas' and adopted the
same after certain modifications. The Committee also considered and adopted the 155 th and 156 th Action taken Reports on the
recommendation/observation contained in 149 th and 151 st reports on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) in respect of the
Department of Elementary and Literacy and Department of Women and Child Development respectively.
 
3.         The Committee decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on
Wednesday, the 2 nd March 2005.  The Committee authorized the Chairman, and in his absence, Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey to
present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Smt. P. Satheedevi and in her absence Shri Manjunath Kunnur to lay the Reports in the
Lok Sabha. 
 
4.         The Committee, then, adjourned at 4.30 p.m.