 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CH
Dec
THREE HUNDRED 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three 
Hundred Fiftieth Report on 
Ministry of Women and Child Development
(Presented to the Rajya
(Laid on the Table of Lok
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023/Agrahayana, 1945, (Saka)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HUNDRED AND FIFTY NINTH REPORT
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three 
Report on Demands for Grants 2023
Ministry of Women and Child Development
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2023)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2023)
 
  
Y STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
Report No 
359 
REPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three 
Demands for Grants 2023-24 of the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development 
 
December, 2023) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in  

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CH
THREE HUNDRED 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred F
2023-24 of Ministry of 
(Presented to the Rajya
(Laid on the Table of Lok
 
 
December
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SP
 
HUNDRED AND FIFTY NINTH REPORT
ON 
Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Fiftieth Report on Demands for Grants 
24 of Ministry of Women and Child Development
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2023)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2023)
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023 / Agrahayana, 1945, (Saka)  
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
REPORT 
Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
Demands for Grants 
Women and Child Development 
, 2023) 
2023) 
  

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …....................................................  (i) 
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................  (ii) 
3.  ACRONYMS.................................................................................................. (iii)-(iv) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…................  1-35 
Chapter-I  -  Recommendations which have been accepted  
 by the Government ............................................................... ..... 2-17 
Chapter -II  -  Recommendations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies........... 18-24 
Chapter-III -  Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee.... 25-34 
 Chapter-IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government are still awaited…...............................................  35 
  
5. RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE................... 36-37 
6. MINUTES...........................................................................................................  38-39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13thSeptember, 2023) 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur   Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
3. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
4. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
5. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
6. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
7. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
8. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
9. Shrimati SangeetaYadav 
10. * Shri Harbhajan Singh  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Shri Gangasandra Siddappa Basavaraj 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Sangam Lal Kadedin Gupta 
15. Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
16. Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
17. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
18. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
19. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
20. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
21. ** Vacant 
22. Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
28. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
29.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
30. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
31. Shri S. Venkatesan  
 
SECRETARIAT 
ShriVimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Ms.Aditi Choudhary, OSD to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha 
Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary 
Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
Shri AshwaniYadav, Secretariat Assistant 
 
 
(i) 
*Nominated w.e.f. 26. 09.2023 
** Vacant w.e.f. 07.12.2023 
 
 
  

 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on 
its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Fifty Ninth Report of the Committee on the Action 
Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Three Hundred and Fiftieth Report 
of the Committee on "Demands for Grants 2023-24 of the Ministry of Women and child Development", 
which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th March, 2023. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations contained in above mentioned Report 
were received from the Ministry of Women and Child Development vide their communication dated  
21st November, 2023. 
3.  The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 12th 
December, 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
12 December,2023 
Agrahayana 21,1945 (Saka)
  
 
  
 
 
 
Shri Vivek Thakur 
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
ACRONMYS 
 
AWC Anganwadi Centre 
AWH Anganwadi Helper 
AWW Anganwadi Worker 
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy 
BBBP Beti Bachao Beti Padhao 
BE Budget Estimates 
CARA Central Adoption Resources Authority 
CPS Child Protection Services 
CSWB Central Social Welfare Board 
CWC Child Welfare Committee 
DBT Direct Benefit Transfer 
DM District Magistrate 
DWS Drinking Water and Sanitation 
EC Empowered Committee 
ECCE Early Childhood Care and Education 
FY Financial Year 
JJB Juvenile Justice Board 
MAM Moderate Acute Malnutrition 
MLALADS Member of Legislative Assembly Local Area Development Scheme 
MPLADS Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme 
MWCD Ministry of Women and Child Development 
NCPCR National Commission for Protection of Child Rights 
NCW National Commission for Women 
NFHS National Family Health Survey 
NIMHANS National Institute of Mental Health & Neurosciences 
NIPCCD National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development 
OSC One Stop Centre 
PAB Programme Approval Board 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
PMMVY Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana 
PW&LM Pregnant Women and Lactating Mother 
RE Revised Estimates 
 
 
(iii)  

 
 
SAG Scheme for Adolescent Girls 
SAM Severe Acute Malnutrition 
SMP Stree Manoraksha Project 
SoE Statement of Expenditure 
SNA Single Nodal Agency 
UC Utilization Certificate 
UT Union Territory 
VC Virtual Conference 
WHL Women Helpline 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                    (iv)  

1 
 
  
REPORT 
The 359th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in its 350th Report on “Demands for Grants 2023-24 of the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development”, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on 28th March, 2023. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations contained in above mentioned 
Report were received from the Ministry of Women and Child Development vide their 
communication dated 21st November, 2023. These have been categorized as follows:- 
Chapter I:  Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
Paras – 2.9, 2.10, 3.1.5, 3.2.15, 3.4.10, 3.5.9, 3.6.6, and 3.6.7 
Total- 8 
Chapter II: Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
Government's replies:- 
Paras –2.7, 2.8, 2.11, 3.1.18, 3.2.16, 3.5.7, and 3.5.8 
Total–7 
Chapter III: Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee:- 
Paras- 3.1.16, 3.1.17, 3.1.19, 3.1.20, 3.3.4  and 4.12 
Total-6 
       Chapter-IV:  Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government are still awaited:- 
Paras –Nil 
Total – Nil 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee also points out that the utilization of funds for different schemes varies from 
70-71% of RE 2022-23. Noting that the Ministry has been allocated 92.7% of the projected demand, 
the Committee recommends that there is a need to encourage state governments to develop a robust 
mechanisms which can help push for enhanced fund utilization from the funds allocated. It is also 
noted by the Committee that funds utilisation out of the allocated amount to various organizations 
have been about 89.5% of the total allocated amount. 
(Para 2.9 of the 350th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that under Mission Shaksham Aganwadi & Poshan 2.0, a sum of 
Rs.19810.87 crore (98.67%) was utilized as against RE of Rs.20077.51 crore for the Financial year 
2022-23. However, Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee and in that 
regard the Ministry has informed that they have already developed a portal on its official website 
for the States/UTs to upload Utilization Certificate (UC)/ Statement of Expenditure (SoE) for the 
funds released to them which will enable faster release of funds to States/ UTs. The utilization of 
funds by the States/ UTs as per Single Nodal Agency (SNA) Reports available in the Public 
Financial Management System (PFMS) portal is also regularly monitored by the Ministry. 
Under Mission Shakti the State Governments/UTs are requested regularly to expedite the 
implementation of schemes/ projects in the review meeting held at various levels including Hon’ble 
Minister and Secretary and also during Programme Approval Board (PAB) meetings with the 
States/UTs. Further, the Government has also developed / launched a portal for submission of UCs/ 
SOEs by States/ UTs. 
Mission Vatsalya Scheme is implemented by subsuming the erstwhile Child Protection 
Services (CPS) Scheme w.e.f. 01.04.2022 (FY 2022-23). Rs.900 crore was allocated during the year 
2021-22 which was increased to Rs.1472.17 crore for the year 2022-23. Subsequently, Mission 

3 
 
Vatsalya guideline was issued by the Ministry of Women and Child Development on 5th July 2022 
which includes financial norms for different components of the scheme. As the scheme is demand 
driven, States/UTs are required to submit their proposals on the basis of financial norms of the 
guidelines and as per their need.  
  
 
The details of fund released to the States/UTs during the last two years i.e. 2021-22 and 
2022-23 furnished by the Ministry are given as under:  
  
                                                                                                                    (In Crores) 
Year B. E.  R. E.  Actual  Exp. % of Exp. on RE 
2021-22 900.00  829.65 761.18  91.74 
2022-23 1472.17 1123.75 1043.20  92.83 
BE – Budget Estimate; RE – Revised Estimate 
  
States/UTs are being regularly followed up and the progress of implementation of scheme are 
also being reviewed from time to time. 
Recommendation 
2. The Committee recommends that it would be beneficial for the Ministry to prepare a 
Standard Operating Procedure towards each major Scheme with responsibilities, timelines and an 
in-built monitoring mechanism so that the progress of the Scheme and the progressive fund 
utilization by States can be systematically tracked. The Committee also recommends that the factors 
responsible for underutilization of funds by States/ bodies be identified and remedial action be taken 
in a time bound manner. 
(Para 2.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has submitted that they have taken note of the recommendation of the 
Committee and has already developed a portal for uploading of UC/SoE through which utilization of 
funds can be monitored under Shaksham Aganwadi & Poshan 2.0. Further, the utilization of funds, 
funds transferred by States from Treasury to Implementing Agencies including Central Share and  
corresponding/ matching State Share are monitored through SNA Reports as reflected in the PFMS 
portal.  

4 
 
Under Mission Shakti, the Ministry has informed that the Standard Operating Procedure 
(SoP) for ongoing scheme One Stop Centre (OSC) and Women Helpline (WHL) are already in place. 
The SoP for newly added component of Nari Adalat is under finalization.  
The Ministry has further informed that the major reason for under utilization of funds under 
OSC component may include non completion of construction of building in time due to non-
availability of land, work agency, etc. Further, there may be cases where the funds are actually 
utilised but the UCs may be furnished to Government in time. 
The Ministry has also submitted that the Government of India has been monitoring the 
schemes through meetings/ Virtual Conferences (VCs) with States /UTs at the highest level in the 
Ministry, official visits and issuing advisories to the States /UTs from time to time for compliance of 
the guidelines and timely submission of UCs and Statement of expenditure to ensure timely release 
of funds. Further, the Government has also developed a portal for submission of UCs/ SoEs by States 
/UTs.  
The Ministry in their reply has stated that Mission Vatsalya Guidelines have been issued to 
the States/UTs for implementation of the scheme. As per the scheme guidelines, Mission Vatsalya 
Portal has been developed to provide a Digital Platform for various MIS related to children in 
difficult circumstances which includes missing, orphaned, abandoned and surrendered children. The 
Portal has been made live on 27.06.2023. Some of the major benefits of Mission Vatsalya portal are 
as under: 
i. Better monitoring through various MIS Dashboards, 
ii. Avoid duplication of work at grassroots level,  
iii. Single platform for all the stakeholders, 
iv. Better Decision/Policy Making,  
v. Optimum use of resources,  
vi. Availability of Child Protection Resource Directory,  
vii. Better citizen participation,  
viii. Availability of Analytical reports and   
ix. Evidence based programme, planning and implementation 
  
The Ministry has conveyed in the Action Taken Note that SoP have been issued to the 
States/UTs for implementation of the Child Helpline 1098, which is one of the components of the 
Mission Vatsalya Scheme.   

5 
 
The Ministry has also informed that States/UTs are being requested regularly to utilise the 
funds keeping in view the norms of Mission Vatsalya Guidelines and also to furnish the requisite 
documents such as UC and SoE for expediting release of funds.  Utilisation of funds are monitored 
through PFMS portal which shows progress of funds viz., release, utilisation and unspent with the 
States/UTs. Further, with a view to have more effective cash management and bring more efficiency 
in the public expenditure management, State Governments have been directed to designate a Single 
Nodal Agency (SNA) for implementing the Centrally-sponsored scheme.   
Furthermore, notification under section 7 of Aadhaar Act for Mission Vatsalya Scheme has 
been issued to the States/UTs for entrying the information on DBT Bharat Portal on the three 
components i.e. (i) Facilities to Children – In kind, (ii) Facilities to Children (Sponsorship) – In Cash 
and (iii) Salary of Staff – In Cash. 
SAKSHAM ANGANWADI & POSHAN 2.0 
Recommendation 
3. The Committee notes that the Budgetary allocations, BE 2022-23 and RE 2022-23 in 
respect of Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 are same at Rs. 20263.07 crores. The actual 
spending as on 31.1.2023 is Rs 14842.32 crores. As for the BE 2023-24, the allocation for the 
Scheme is Rs. 20554.31 crores. The Committee appreciates the enhancement of Rs. 291 crores in the 
budget for Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0. The Committee also reiterates its recommendation 
made in its 346th Report that a blueprint, prepared in consultation with States, towards 
infrastructure development and capacity building of AWCs will prove to be of immense help in 
identification and augmentation of various services and reach of AWCs. 
(Para 3.1.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
The details of budgetary allocation to Mission Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 for the 
financial year 2022-23 furnished by Ministry is as under: 
                                                              (Rs. In crore) 
BE RE Total Expenditure   
Rs.20294.58 Rs. 20077.51 Rs.19810.87 

6 
 
 
The Budgetary allocation for the Mission Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 in the current 
FY 2023-24 is Rs.20554.31 crore. 
The Committee in its 346th Report had recommended for infrastructure development of 
Anganwadi Centres (AWCs). The recommendation made by the Committee is reproduced as under: 
“The Committee notes the engagements being made with States in respect of AWCs and is of 
the view that a blueprint, prepared in consultation with States, towards infrastructure development 
and capacity building of AWCs will prove to be of immense help in identification and augmentation 
of various services and reach of AWCs. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take 
note of this and initiate appropriate action towards it”. 
Apprising the Committee about Action Taken with regard to recommendation made in the 
346th Report of the Committee on infrastructure development for AWCs the Ministry has informed 
that during the Financial Year 2022-23, the Ministry has released funds for infrastructure 
development of AWCs which are as under:  
Sl. No. Name of Component   Funds Released 
(Rs. In Lakh) 
No. of AWCs proposed for 
development of infrastructure  
1 For upgradation of 
AWCs in Saksham 
AWCs 
21273.60 41192 
2 For Construction of 
Toilets in AWCs 
11620.56 75295 
3 For providing Drinking 
Water Facilities in 
AWCs  
6568.09 80242 
4 For Construction of 
AWCs in convergence 
with MGNREGs 
25246.80 18819 
 

7 
 
Further, Ministry of Women and Child Development has taken a decision to upgrade all 
Mini-AWCs to Main AWCs to ensure that both Nutrition and Early Childhood Care and Education 
(ECCE) are given equal priority, which is not possible with one worker. The States/ UTs have been 
asked to submit proposals for up-gradation of Mini-AWCs. Based on the proposals received from 
State/ UTs, 7453 Mini-AWCs have already been upgraded to Main AWCs.  
The Ministry has informed that under POSHON 2.0 in Anganwadi Services, following 
initiatives have been taken for improving the condition of Anganwadi Centres across the country: 
i. Under Saksham Anganwadi, infrastructure in 2 lakh AWCs @ 40,000 AWCs per year shall 
be strengthened and upgraded across the country for improving nutrition delivery and early 
childhood care and development services. 40,000 AWCs have been identified in FY 2022-23 
for upgradation as Saksham Anganwadi. In the FY 2022-23, 41192 Anganwadi Centres  have 
been identified to be made into Saksham Anganwadis, which will be upgraded with LED 
screens, Wi-fi, smart audio-visual teaching aids, Poshan Vatikas, Rainwater harvesting 
structures (RWHSs) etc. 
ii. Under Swachhta Action Plan, provision of drinking water facilities and toilet facilities has 
been made. The cost norm for toilet/sanitation facility has been revised from Rs. 12,000/- to 
Rs. 36,000/- per unit while for drinking water facilities, the cost norm has been revised from 
Rs. 10,000/- to Rs.17,000/- per unit. 
iii. Provision has been made for construction of 50,000 AWCs (with toilet and water facilities) 
under Saksham Anganwdi and Poshan 2.0 during 2021-22 to 2025-26, to target those AWCs 
which are running in rented premises. 
iv. Anganwadi Centres across the country have been provided with Growth Monitoring Devices 
and Smart Phones for efficient service delivery. 
v. Streamlined Guidelines were issued on 13.01.2021, covering several aspects such as quality 
assurance, roles and responsibilities of duty holders, procedure for procurement, integrating 
Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH) concepts and 
Data management and Monitoring through ‘Poshan Tracker’ for transparency, efficiency and 
accountability in delivery of Supplementary Nutrition. 
 These measures have resulted in improvement in infrastructural facilities and service 
delivery at Anganwadi Centres. As per the report of National Family Health Survey (NFHS)-5 
conducted in 2019-21, 32.1% children under 5 years of age are underweight, 19.3% are wasted and 
35.5% are stunted indicating a reduction from the previous NFHS – 4 conducted in 2015-16, which 
reported 35.8% children under 5 years of age as underweight, 21% wasted and 38.4% stunted 
respectively. Technology under Poshan Tracker is being leveraged for dynamic identification of 
stunting, wasting, under-weight prevalence among children; and last mile tracking of nutrition 
service delivery. In the month of April 2023, close to 6.34 crore children under the age of 5 years 

8 
 
were measured for their nutrition status on Poshan Tracker. Of the 6 crore children measured. Of 
these, 2.26 % have been found to be Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM) and 4.75% have been found 
to be Moderate Acute Malnutrition (MAM). This is against 19.3% wasting as per NFHS-5 for 
children under the age of 5 years.  
Further, to strengthen Anganwadi services and to achieve intended outcomes, capacity 
building of Anganwadi workers are a priority area under Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0. 
AWWs are regularly trained on supplementary nutrition guidelines, growth measurement, nutrition 
norms, food safety norms and practices, new born care and early assessment of child hood illnesses, 
ante-natal and post-natal practices, Infant and Young Child Feeding Practices and use of growth 
monitoring devices.  
 Periodic training is held on Master Trainers and field level functionaries. Besides this, 
learning modules are also made available on Poshan Tracker, the ICT application used by 
Anganwadi Workers. 11 e-learning modules have been prepared and uploaded. 
POSHAN ABHIYAAN 
Recommendation 
4. The Committee while noting the above measures appreciates the technological interventions 
in collecting the data related to Anganwadi Services and Poshan Abhiyaan on real time basis. The 
Committee, accordingly, keeping in view the fact that since this Integrated Nutrition Support aims at 
improving the nutritional and health status in children, adolescent girls, pregnant women and 
lactating mothers and addresses the challenges of malnutrition, recommends that the Ministry must 
closely monitor the progress of the Scheme in the States and impress upon them to prioritize these 
welfare schemes so that benefits reach the needy. 
(Para 3.2.15 ibid) 
Action Taken 
In order to closely monitor the progress of the scheme, a robust ICT enabled platform named 
Poshan tracker has been designed to capture near real-time data on implementation and monitoring of 
POSHAN Abhiyaan across the country. The Poshan Tracker management application monitors 
activities at the Anganwadi Centre (AWC) including service deliveries of Anganwadi Workers 

9 
 
(AWWs) and thereby facilitates complete beneficiary management. Around 10.11 crore beneficiaries 
are registered under the Poshan Tracker and more than 94% are Aadhaar verified.  
The Poshan Tracker also enables better coordination and communication between AWWs 
and supervisors. The supervisors can access the data remotely and provide guidance or feedback to 
the AWWs. This improves the quality of service delivery and ensures that beneficiaries receive the 
necessary support promptly. To ensure last mile tracking of service delivery SMS alerts to 
beneficiaries has been introduced for delivery of Take Home Ration (not raw ration). Further, a 
Poshan Helpline operationalised in November 2022 has been made available for registering 
concerns. Through the help line, a beneficiary can raise a concern or a query about the services 
offered under Mission Poshan 2.0. 
In order to make the programme more effective and to ensure that all benefits including 
supplementary nutrition should reach to the intended beneficiaries, Government has taken steps to 
strengthen nutritional content, delivery outreach and outcomes with focus on developing practices 
that nurture health, wellness and immunity to disease and malnutrition. Steps have been taken to 
improve nutritional quality and testing in accredited labs, strengthen delivery and leverage 
technology to improve governance. In this regard, Streamlined Guidelines were issued on 
13.01.2021, covering several aspects such as quality assurance, roles and responsibilities of duty 
holders, procedure for procurement, integrating AYUSH concepts and Data management and 
monitoring through “Poshan Tracker” for transparency, efficiency and accountability in delivery of 
Supplementary Nutrition has been issued. Under these guidelines, the District Magistrate (DM) has 
been designated as the Nodal Point in the district for monitoring nutritional status and quality 
standards.  
Besides State Level Committees under Chief Secretaries are mandated to monitor the 
outcomes of the scheme in convergence with line departments. Further, vide Poshan 2.0 guidelines, 
States/UTs have been advised with respect to the following- 
 To ensure dietary diversity and last mile delivery of Take Home Ration to the beneficiary.  
 Preparation of Take Home Ration using locally available and culturally appropriate food 
ingredients. 

10 
 
 To delineate the Take Home Ration products that are being delivered to target beneficiaries 
based on their nutritional requirements such as severely acutely malnourished children 
(SAM), adolescent girls in the age group of 14-18 years, pregnant women and lactating 
mothers, besides children aged 6 months to 3 years. 
 To mandatorily provide millets as part of supplementary nutrition, at least once a week in 
palatable form 
MISSION VATSALYA 
Recommendation 
5. The Committee observes that it is common knowledge that there are states where there are 
either none or very few juvenile observation homes. Moreover the living conditions in a number of 
such juvenile homes are inadequate and require enhancement in terms of adequate space, quality of 
toilets, recreational activities, and trained staff. The Committee recommends that such issues be 
taken note of and remedial action be initiated so that the vulnerable children get proper support. 
(Para 3.4.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 The Ministry has informed that following actions have been taken for effective 
implementation of Mission Vatsalya:-  
i. as per the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (JJ Act, 2015) (as 
amended in 2021), the Child Care Institutions (CCIs) for children in conflict with law includes 
Observation Homes for temporary reception, care and rehabilitation of any child alleged to be in 
conflict with law, during the pendency of any inquiry under the Act. The CCIs including observation 
homes normally accommodate 50 children, however, for North Eastern States, Himalayan States and 
Hilly areas in other States, CCIs with capacity of 25 children are supported, as per the need of the 
States. State-wise list of Juvenile Observation Homes along with residents therein (as on 31.03.2023) 
is given as under:- 
  
Sl. No. State Total Juvenile Home Total Beneficiaries 
1 Andhra Pradesh 13* 191 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 1* 8 
3 Assam 6 131 

11 
 
4 Bihar 24 1001 
5 Chhattisgarh 22 387 
6 Goa 4 12 
7 Gujarat 6 126 
8 Haryana 7 251 
9 Himachal Pradesh 2* 40 
10 Jammu and Kashmir 3 74 
11 Jharkhand 15 434 
12 Karnataka 19 149 
13 Kerala 12 96 
14 Madhya Pradesh 21 365 
15 Maharashtra 54 1992 
16 Manipur 8* 53 
17 Meghalaya 7 53 
18 Mizoram 11 133 
19 Nagaland 14 27 
20 Orissa 10* 322 
21 Punjab 6 150 
22 Rajasthan 52 519 
23 Sikkim 2 10 
24 Tamil Nadu 11 411 
25 Tripura 4 10 
26 Uttar Pradesh 30 1433 
27 Uttarakhand 14 317 
28 West Bengal 14* 650 
29 Telangana 5* 186 
30 Andaman & Nicobar Islands 1* 1 
31 Chandigarh 1* 32 
32 Dadra & Nagar Haveli and 
Daman & Diu 
0 0 
33 Ladakh 0 0 
34 Lakshadweep 0 0 
35 NCT of Delhi 5 135 
36 Puducherry 3 35 
    407 9734 
  * Observation-cum-Special Homes. 
  
ii. The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Model Rules, 2016 (as amended in 
2022) provides under Rule 29 to Rule 40 the parameters and standards of care for the facilities to be 
made available in CCIs including Observation Homes such as segregation of children as per age, sex, 
maintaining adequate lighting, heating and cooling arrangement, ventilation, safe drinking water, 
clean and accessible gender and age appropriate and disable friendly toilets, clothing, bedding, 
toiletries and other articles, minimum nutritional standards and diet scale, medical care, education, 
vocational training, recreational facilities etc.  

12 
 
iii.  As per Section 106 of the JJ Act, 2015, the primary responsibility of implementation of the JJ 
Act, 2015 including providing of facilities and maintaining of standards of care for CCIs including 
Juvenile Observation Homes lies with the State/UT Governments.    
iv.  Under section 54 of the JJ Act, 2015, the State Governments have to appoint Inspection 
Committees and under section 53, to assess the basic facilities and infrastructure of the Institution for 
maintaining their standards. As per JJ Act, 2015 (as amended in 2021), District Magistrates have 
been empowered as the nodal authority in district for children in need of care and protection.    
v.  The Ministry regularly follows up with the State/ UT Governments to ensure that CCIs 
adhere to standards of care as per the JJ Act, 2015 provisions. Various advisories have been issued to 
all States/UTs regarding mandatory inspection of all CCIs.  
vi.  Further, the Ministry is implementing a Centrally sponsored scheme namely Mission 
Vatsalya through State and UT Governments for providing support to set up CCIs including 
Observation Homes for delivering services inter-alia age-appropriate education, access to vocational 
training, recreation, health care, etc. for Children in Conflict with Law (CCL) residing in these 
Homes.  
vii.  The Ministry of Women and Child Development (MWCD) with National Commission for 
Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) has organized multiple regional symposiums on Child 
Protection, Child Safety and Child Welfare covering various States. These were organised on 
02.07.2023, 09.07.2023, 22.07.2023, 30.07.2023, 12.08.2023 and 18.08.2023 at New Delhi, Bhopal, 
Mumbai, Ranchi, Guwahati and Kashi respectively.  
viii.  A meeting under the chairpersonship of Additional Secretary, WCD was held with 14 
States/UTs on 14.07.2023 to review the Automation and Integration of Child Helpline and Mission 
Vatsalya Scheme. Second meeting under the chairpersonship of Additional Secretary, WCD was also 
held with all States/UTs on 19.07.2023 to review issues regarding effective implementation of the 
Mission Vatsalya Scheme. 
ix.  Annual plan and financial proposals of the States/UTs have been considered and appraised by 
the Project Approval Board (PAB) for implementation of the Mission Vatsalya Scheme.  The PAB 
meetings have been held on the following dates :   
 

13 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Date of PAB 
meetings 
Venue of the 
Meetings 
States/UTs 
1 08.05.2023  Vigyan Bhawan, New 
Delhi  
Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, Uttar 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand 
2 12.05.2023 Shillong, Meghalaya Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura 
3 16.05.2023 Vigyan Bhawan, New 
Delhi 
Chandigarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and 
Punjab 
4 19.05.2023 Pune, Maharashtra Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman  & Diu 
    Maharashtra, Telangana, Goa 
5 30.05.2023 Vigyan Bhawan, New 
Delhi 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Bihar, 
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal 
6 02.06.2023 
  
Konchi, Kerala  Andhra Pradesh, Lakshadweep, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Puducherry and Tamil Nadu  
7 06.06.2023 Vigyan Bhawan, New 
Delhi  
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Manipur, Odisha and 
Rajasthan   
 
x.  The Ministry of Women and Child Development (MWCD) , Government of India conducted 
Regional Symposium on Child Protection, Safety and Child Welfare at New Delhi, Bhopal, Mumbai, 
Ranchi, Guwahati and Varanasi. 
The Symposiums were attended by representatives from Child Welfare Committees (CWCs), 
Juvenile Justice Boards (JJBs), Members of Village Child Protection Committee (VCPC), NGOs and 
Anganwadi Workers. The regional symposiums were held across the country to raise awareness and 
outreach about child protection, safety and welfare issues. 
 
 

14 
 
MISSION SHAKTI 
Recommendation 
6. The Committee notes that Beti Bachao Beti Padhao is a flagship scheme of the government to 
end female foeticide and empower the adolescent girls which has shown promising results in recent 
past. The Committee appreciates the new initiative and innovation under the scheme such as 
Operational Manual that include activity calendar for whole year and Kanya Shiksha Pravesh Utsav 
campaign in convergence with Department of School education and literacy. The Committee also 
appreciates that the scheme, has been expanded to all the districts and Ministry’s efforts towards 
skilling girls in non-traditional livelihood activities. The Committee recommends that state should be 
encouraged to adopt innovative measures mentioned above in their women empowerment schemes 
for better outcome. 
(Para 3.5.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that it has noted the observation of the Committee. The Ministry 
has also informed that Ministry, under the chairpersonship of Hon’ble Minister, has conducted Zonal 
and Sub Zonal meetings with all State/UTs for encouraging to adopt innovative measures in their 
women empowerment schemes for better outcome. Further, the operational manual has been 
translated in 10 regional languages for wider reach. The activity calendar under Operational manual 
is suggestive in nature and the State can choose to conduct their own activities based on their local 
context and needs. Regular meetings are held to monitor the physical and financial progress of Beti 
Bachao Beti Padhao (BBBP) and communication has been sent to the State/ UTs where there is 
decline in the indicators. 
SCHEMES FUNDED FROM NIRBHAYA FUND 
Recommendation 
7. The Committee observes that the fund has been utilized for establishing one stop centre, 
making safety devices, setting up fast-track courts and to procure forensic kits for sexual assault 
cases among others which help the security agency to curb the crime against women. The 
Committee also notes that emphasis on project features like optimum use of existing infrastructure 
and innovative use of technology have encouraged low-cost interventions oriented towards 

15 
 
surveillance, reporting and investigation of crimes .Apart from focus on urban crimes in public 
spaces, the Committee, suggests that the guidelines governing the use of the Nirbhaya Fund should 
be broadened to incentivize interventions in areas, such as Community Policing in rural areas 
with an equal emphasis on psychological assistance to women victims and assistance for setting 
up women coaching centre for Police recruitment which will help aspiring women candidates to 
get selected in Police force and that will improve the representation of women in Police force 
especially in rural areas, which will eventually help to reduce crime against women and utilization 
of fund will also be improved. The Committee further recommends that the Empowered Committee 
(EC)  should hold discussions with the concerned Officials of the state Governments to understand 
the ground reality and the aspects which are impacting utilization by states so that remedial action 
can be taken and projects can be fast paced in coordination with states lagging behind. 
(Para 3.6.6 ibid) 
8. The Committee notes that the Ministry has mentioned factors such as delay by States/ UTs/ 
IAs in furnishing Statement of Expenditure (SoE) and/ or Utilization Certificates (UCs) for 
facilitating further release of funds also impact fund availability leading to slow progress. The 
Committee is of the view that in order to improve fund utilization status and usage of the Nirbhaya 
fund, sustained requisite action at State level is the need of the hour to bring about an appreciable 
impact on the safety and security of women and recommends for ensuring the same 
 (Para 3.6.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has submitted that as per Framework for Nirbhaya Fund, the funding is 
provided for projects aimed at enhancing the safety and security for women in the country. The 
projects/ schemes under Nirbhaya Fund are demand driven. The projects/ schemes appraised by 
Empowered Committee (EC) under Framework for Nirbhaya Fund are having staggered 
implementation schedule. While some of the appraised projects are directly implemented by Central 
Ministries/ Departments; majority of the projects are implemented through State Governments/ 
Union Territory Administrations/ Autonomous Bodies/ PSUs in which Central Government releases 
the funds to States/ UTs as per prescribed fund-sharing pattern of respective projects schemes. 
Thereafter, implementation on ground is done by the States/ UTs in the given timelines. 
The Ministry has further added that under the One Stop Centre (OSC) component of Mission 
Shakti, one out of five integrated services available to women in distress and in need is psycho-social 

16 
 
counselling through trained counsellors. The Ministry has also provided training for the staff and 
counsellors of OSCs through National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), 
Bengaluru under the “Stree Manoraksha Project (SMP)”.  
While the Empowered Committee review the status of implementation of projects from time 
to time in conjunction with the concerned Ministries/ Departments/ Implementing Agencies as well 
as States/ UTs and the concerned Ministries/ Departments / Implementing Agencies also monitor the 
progress of implementation at their levels, separately the States governments / UTs are requested 
regularly to expedite the implementation of Nirbhaya projects in the review meetings held at various 
levels including Hon’ble Minister and Secretary, WCD and also during PAB meetings with the 
States/ UTs.   
The Ministry has further informed that prior to implementation of Mission Shakti, umbrella 
scheme for safety, security and empowerment of women during the XV Finance  
Commission Period, the Ministry held extensive consultations with States/UTs so that the problems 
being faced by them in implementation of schemes are identified and suitably redressed in the 
scheme guidelines.  One of the reasons identified was that there were provisions for release of funds 
directly to the District Administration under the One Stop Centre, Women Helpline schemes 
implemented by the Ministry since their launch in 2015. Accordingly, the Mission Shakti guidelines 
included provision for release of funds only the States/ UTs, who shall be responsible for transfer of 
funds as per scheme guidelines to the concerned districts for implementation of those components as 
per the procedure prescribed by the Department of Expenditure, Government of India.  The 
states/UTs are also made responsible for monitoring of fund utilization as well as the outcomes of 
specific components included under Mission Shakti.  There exists a well-structured mechanism for 
effective implementation of the Scheme and its monitoring that includes utilization of funds.  
Further, Ministry has also created a dedicated portal for submission of Utilization Certificate (UCs) 
 and Statement of Expenditure (SOE), so as to ensure that all the UCs and SOEs are available at a 
single place for effective monitoring of funds utilization.  
Further, officials of the Ministry regularly undertake field visits to the States/UTs from time 
to time to assess the ground level implementation of the schemes / projects. It is expected that the 
utilization of funds will improve with the new systems put in place and the Ministry will make all 
efforts in this direction.   

17 
 
The Ministry has further submitted that suggestions of the Committee have been noted for 
discussion with the line Ministries/ Departments/ Independent Agencies for further improving the 
system of implementation and monitoring 
 
**** 
  

18 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24) OF 
THEMINISTRY 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee notes that the Ministry acts as the nodal ministry for the development of 
women and children, covering issues of welfare services, gender sensitization, and training for 
employment generation for women and many of the programmes run by the Ministry play a 
complementary role to developmental programmes in the sectors of health, education, rural 
development, and safety of women. The Committee appreciates that under BE 2023-24, the Ministry 
has been allocated Rs. 25,448.75 crores which translates to a 6% increase over the revised estimates 
of 2022-23.      
(Para 2.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 The Ministry has noted the recommendation. 
Recommendation 
2. The Committee notes that the Ministry has utilized Rs. 17251.95 crores as on 27.02.2023 
which is about 72.09% of the amount allocated under RE i.eRs.23912.69 crores. The Committee also 
recommends that the factors responsible for underutilization of funds by States/ bodies be identified 
and remedial action be taken in a time bound manner. 
(Para 2.8 ibid)  
Action Taken 
The Ministry has submitted that they have made all out efforts for utilization of funds 
allocated to the Ministry by taking up matter with State/ UTs. The total utilization of fund as on 
31.3.2023 was actually Rs.23517.34 crore which is 98.35% of RE. As per the Ministry allocation 
under RE for 2022-23 was almost utilized and thus, there was no underutilization of fund during that 
year. 

19 
 
 
Recommendation 
3. Noting the allocations under major Schemes, the Committee points out that as per BE 2023-
24, Majority of the Ministry’s total allocation distributed primarily amongst the three Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes namely SakshamAnganwadi and POSHAN 2.0 Scheme, Mission Shakti and 
Mission Vatsalya. Also, around Rs. 258 crores have been allocated amongst autonomous bodies such 
as National Commission for Women, Central Adoption Resource Authority, National Institute of 
Public Cooperation and Child Development and the National Commission for the Protection of 
Child’s Rights. The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry implements some of the most 
important programmes in the country addressing the needs of women and young children and 
therefore enhanced budgetary allocations for the various Schemes of the Ministry would be helpful 
for further pushing its mandate. 
    (Para 2.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
Budget allocation for 2023-24 has been increased by 6.4% over the Revised Estimate of 
previous financial year. Moreover, efforts are being made for further enhancement of budgetary 
allocation under certain schemes/ components being implemented by the Ministry. 
 
SAKSHAM ANGANWADI & POSHAN 2.0 
Recommendation 
4. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should point out to the respective State 
Administrations to take strong initiatives towards completion of construction of toilets and drinking 
water facilities at such AWCs where the same is missing. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may consider setting up a suitable body which can take a look at the remuneration that is 
being paid both at Centre and at State levels to Anganwadi workers and recommend a base 
reasonable salary, with suitable increments, keeping in mind that it is a welfare programme. 
(Para 3.1.18 ibid) 
 
 

20 
 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that they had approved construction of toilets under Swachhta 
Action Plan (SAP) at a cost of Rs.12,000/- during  FY 2017-18 to FY 2019-20. However, since this 
amount was found insufficient by many States/UTs, the cost of construction of Toilet per AWC has 
been revised to Rs.36,000/- form Rs.12,000/-. Cost for providing drinking water facilities has also 
been revised to Rs.17000/- from Rs 10,000/-. The details of funds released after revision of cost for 
both Toilet and Drinking facilities are as under: 
Sl. No. Name of Component Funds released 
(Rs. In lakh) 
No. of AWCs proposed for 
development of 
infrastructure 
1 For Construction of 
Toilets in AWCs 11620.56 75295 
2 
For providing 
Drinking Water 
Facilities in AWCs 
6568.09 80242 
 
Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) and Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs) are paid monthly 
honorarium as decided by the Government of India from time to time, which is uniform in all 
States/UTs. Presently,  AWWs at main-AWCs are paid an honorarium of Rs.4,500/- per month; 
AWWs at mini-AWCs Rs.3,500/- per month and AWHs are paid  Rs.2,250/- per month at the 
prescribed cost sharing ratio between the Centre and State/UT. Also, performance linked incentive of 
Rs.250/- per month paid to AWHs and Rs.500/- per month paid to AWWs. In addition, State/UTs are 
also paying additional monetary incentives/ honorarium to these functionaries form their own 
resources.  
The steps taken to improve the working condition of AWWs/ AWHs are as under:- 
 
i. Honorarium: From 1st October, 2018, Government of India has enhanced the honorarium 
of AWWs at main-AWCs from Rs.3,000/- to Rs. 4,500/- per month; AWWs at mini-
AWCs from Rs.2,250/- to Rs.3,500/- per month; AWHs from Rs.1,500/- to Rs.2,250/- per 
month. 
ii. Leave: They have been allowed paid absence of 180 days of maternity leave. Also 20 
days annual leave are permissible. 
iii. Promotion Avenues: 50% posts of AWWs shall be filled by promotion of Anganwadi 
Helpers with 5 years of experience and 50% posts of supervisors shall be filled by 

21 
 
promotion of Anganwadi Workers with 5 year of experience subject to fulfillment of 
other criteria. 
iv. Uniform: There is a provision for set of two Uniform (Saree/ suit per annum) to 
AWW/AWH. 
v. Anganwadi Workers have been provided with smart phones for efficient implementation 
of the scheme. 
vi. Streamlined guidelines have already been issued by this Ministry on 13.01.2021, which 
provides for quality assurance, roles and responsibilities of duty holders, procedure for 
procurement, integrating AYUSH concepts and data management. 
vii. Anganwadi workers/ Helpers have been included in Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan: 
Insurance Package for their sheer hardwork and dedication during COVID 19 pandemic. 
During Poshan Pakhwada 2023, a one-time special honorarium/incentive was given to 2 best 
performing AWWs (Rs 5000/ per AWW) and 2 best performing AWHs (Rs 2500 per AWH) from 2 
best performing AWCs per block across the country. 
 
POSHAN ABHIYAAN 
Recommendation 
5. The Committee further states that the spread of Covid and subsequent lockdowns have made 
programmes like Poshan 2.0 even more important as the pandemic has brought serious economic 
and social welfare challenges for the country and especially for the economically weaker sections 
of the society. Thus, such nutritional programmes require a strong push. Besides enhanced 
budgetary support, successful implementation would require sustained monitoring and a combined 
multi-sectoral approach. State-specific time bound strategies which take into account various 
socioeconomic factors, sectors and dimensions of nutrition be also incorporated in the roadmap. 
 
(Para 3.2.16 ibid) 
Action Taken 
The Minister has informed that Saksham Anganwadi and Mission Poshan 2.0 (hereinafter 
referred to as Saksham Anganwadi) aim to address Government’s commitment to address the 
challenge of child malnutrition and maternal under-nutrition through a strategic shift in nutrition 

22 
 
content and delivery and create conditions and a convergent eco-system to develop practices that 
nurture health, wellness and immunity.  
With a view to address various gaps and shortcomings in the on-going nutrition programme 
and to improve implementation as well as to accelerate improvement in nutrition and child 
development outcomes, the existing scheme components have been re-organized under Poshan 2.0 
into the primary verticals given below: 
 Nutrition Support for POSHAN through Supplementary Nutrition Programme (SNP) for 
children of the age group of 06 months to 6 years, pregnant women and lactating mothers 
(PWLM); and for Adolescent Girls in the age group of 14 to 18 years in Aspirational Districts 
and North Eastern Region (NER); 
 Early Childhood Care and Education [3-6 years] and early stimulation for (0-3 years); 
 Anganwadi Infrastructure including modern, upgraded Saksham  Anganwadi; and 
 Poshan Abhiyaan 
The objectives of Poshan 2.0 are as follows:  
 To contribute to human capital development of the country; 
 Address challenges of malnutrition; Promote nutrition awareness and good eating habits for 
sustainable health and wellbeing; and 
 Address nutrition related deficiencies through key strategies. 
Poshan 2.0 focuses on Maternal Nutrition, Infant and Young Child Feeding Norms, Treatment 
Protocols for SAM/MAM and Wellness through AYUSH practices to reduce wasting and under-
weight prevalence besides stunting and anaemia, supported by the ‘Poshan Tracker’, a new, robust 
ICT centralised data system which is being linked with the RCH Portal (Anmol) of MoHFW. 
Under POSHAN Abhiyaan to ensure effective Convergence at State level, the Chief Secretary is 
required to chair the Convergence Action Plan (CAP) meeting on quarterly basis. Similarly, 
DC/DMs also need to take CAP meetings on quarterly basis. 
MISSION SHAKTI 
Recommendation 
6. The Committee appreciates that funds allocated under Mission Shakti have been 
increased by 38% in the budgeted estimates for 2023-24 as compared to revised estimates of 2022-
23. The Committee also notes that a number of Sub-Schemes are part of Mission Shakti. The 
Committee recommends that the utilization trend under each sub-scheme be analysed and the issues, 

23 
 
leading to underutilization by States, identified for sharing with the States for them to take suitable 
measures for improving their utilisation.                                                                 
(Para 3.5.7 ibid) 
7. The Committee observes that Mission Shakti is an important scheme for empowering women. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should, in consultation with States, develop a 
mechanism for regular monitoring of fund utilization. 
(Para 3.5.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that prior to implementation of Mission Shakti, umbrella scheme 
for safety, security and empowerment of women during the XV Finance Commission Period , the 
Ministry held extensive consultations with States /UTs so that the issues being faced by them in 
implementation of schemes are identified and suitably addressed in the scheme guidelines. One of 
the issues identified was that there were provision for release of funds directly to the District 
Administration under the One Stop Center, Women Helpline and Beti Bachao Beti Padhao Schemes 
implemented by the Government since their launch in 2015. Accordingly, the Mission Shakti 
guidelines included provision for release of funds only the States/UTs, who shall be responsible for 
transfer of funds as per scheme guidelines, to the concerned districts for implementation of those 
components as per the procedure prescribed by the Department of Expenditure, Government of India. 
The States / UTs are also made responsible for monitoring of fund utilization as well as the outcomes 
of specific components included under Mission Shakti, as per prescribed framework for 
implementation. There exists a well- structured mechanism for effective implementation of the 
Scheme and its monitoring that includes utilization of funds. Further, Ministry has also created a 
dedicated portal for submission of Utilization Certificate (UCs) and Statement of Expenditure (SOE), 
so as to ensure that all the UCs and SOEs are available at a single place for effective monitoring of 
funds utilization.  
Explaining the reasons for underutilization of funds under OSC the Ministry submitted that 
Shakti Niwas and Shakti Sadan component included non-completion of construction of building in 
time due to various reasons including non-availability of land, delay in finalization of  executing 
agency etc. Further, they have added that there may be cases where the funds were actually utilized 
but the UCs might not have been furnished to Central Government in time. 

24 
 
The Ministry has further informed that PAB meetings are held at the level of Secretary, 
MWCD, with the Principal Secretary/ Secretary of the States Governments/UTs. While considering 
the new proposals form States/ UTs, the progress of implementation including the utilization of funds 
is also reviewed.  
It has also been conveyed by the Ministry that it also monitors the implementation of schemes 
including utilization of funds through meetings/ VCs with the States /UTs at various levels including 
at the level of the Hon’ble Minister. Field visits by the officers of the Ministry are undertaken from 
time to time to assess the ground level implementation of the schemes. The Ministry expects that the 
utilization of funds will improve with the new systems put in place and the Ministry will make all 
efforts in that direction.   
As regards underutilization of funds under Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana 
(PMMVY), according to the Ministry there was no under-utilization of funds as the disbursement to 
beneficiaries was to the tune of Rs.3091 crores during the financial year 2022-23 and the expenditure 
of PMMVY Scheme was Rs.2032.80 crores against the BE of Rs.2048.01 crores.  
As regards Palna sub-scheme, the Ministry has submitted that the underutilization of funds 
was due to non-receipt of adequate proposals from the State Governments along with Local 
Government Directory codes for conversion of Anganwadi cum creches. The Ministry has approved 
a total of 5,222 Anganwadi cum Creches (2497 during FY 2022-23 and 2725 during FY2023-24). 
Further, the Ministry has informed that the States/UTs have expressed difficulties in the execution of 
guidelines of Palna under Mission Shakti. Accordingly, with the approval of Department of 
Expenditure, the cost norms have been revised for Anganwadi cum Creches, and have been 
communicated to all States/ UTs. 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
SAKSHAM ANGANWADI & POSHAN 2.0 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee notes that the Ministry, on the aspect of finding avenues for CSR funds for 
building AWCs has stated that to raise alternative sources of funding, States may involve individuals, 
companies, and CSR funds for construction of AWCs purely on a pro bono basis without any 
obligations. The Committee is of the view that in order for CSR funds to flow into this social sector 
scheme, the Ministry would be required to formulate parametric guidelines with suitable incentives 
for corporates so that such sources of funding get enhanced. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may discuss the matter with States and the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and take suitable 
measures towards this. 
(Para 3.1.16 ibid) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that States/UTs have been advised to continue to tap funds for 
construction of AWC buildings from various schemes such as MPLADs, MLALADS, BRGF 
(Backward Regions Grant Funds), RIDF (Rural Infrastructure Development  Fund), Finance 
Commission Grants to Panchayati Raj Institutions, National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(NREGA), Multi-Sectoral Development Programme (MSDP) of Ministry of Minority Affairs, etc. 
State at their level in their own discretion to involve Individuals, Companies, Business Houses and 
Institution of repute, CSR funds for construction of AWCs purely on pro bono basis without any 
obligation, Similarly, the DMs  to encourage/ mobilize resources for this purely on pro bono basis 
and without any obligation. States /UTs to similarly permit funding of Anganwadi Infrastructure e.g., 
Toilets, RWHSs, DWS etc., or any aspect of Anganwadi activity such as ECCE material, furniture, 
cooking utensils, kitchen infrastructure, storage facility, etc. 
Recommendation/Observation by the Committee 
The Committee notes and appreciates the various steps being taken by the Ministry 
towards generating funding towards the building of AWCs. The Committee is of the view that 

26 
 
formulating a set of guidelines by the Ministry in consultation and coordination with concerned 
stakeholders, for corporates to channelize their CSR funds into building Anganwadi Centers 
shall be an impactful initiative. These defined Guidelines will be helpful in creating clear, 
measurable parameters for the corporates to follow towards investing in building anganwadi 
centers and in allocating CSR funds that are in alignment with the interests of corporates, the 
Government, and local communities, thereby supporting the development and well-being of 
children and women across the nation. 
Recommendation 
2. The Committee noting the gap between sanctioned and operational Anganwadi Centers in 
various States recommends that the Ministry take up the matter with the respective States. 
(Para 3.1.17 ibid) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that they have issued directions to States /UTs to re-assess actual 
requirement of AWCs and accordingly operationalize the non-operational AWCs. However, in spite 
of repeated requests/directions, some of the States could not operationalize all the sanctioned AWCs. 
Therefore, it has been decided that all the non-operational AWCs would be deemed to have been 
surrendered so that they could be re-allocated to other States which are in need of AWCs. 
Recommendation/Observation by the Committee 
The Committee notes the position and suggests that the reasons put forth by the States 
can be discussed further with them for any remedial action before such AWCs are deemed 
surrendered for re-allocation to other States which are in need of AWCs. 
Recommendation 
3. The Committee recommends that the Ministry make a thorough study through NIPCCD on 
the status and challenges being faced by AWCs, Anganwadi workers, and the States, based on which 
suitable follow up measures can be planned. 
(Para 3.1.19 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 

27 
 
The Ministry has informed that they have already taken a series of steps for improving the 
working conditions of Anganwadi Workers as enunciated in Point No. 3.1.18. A communication was 
circulated in the States/UTs directing that Anganwadi Workers/Anganwadi Helpers shall not be used 
for non-ICDS activities in the States/UTs so that their time can be used for managing nutrition and 
early childhood care and education service deliveries at the Anganwadi Centers with focused 
commitment. 
Recommendation/Observation by the Committee 
The Committee appreciates the various steps listed for improving the working condition 
of AWWs/ AWHs in terms of Honorarium, Leave, Promotion Avenues, provision for Uniform 
and smart phones etc. Further, the Committee reiterates its recommendation for conducting a 
comprehensive study through the National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child 
Development (NIPCCD) as it will provide invaluable insights into the status and challenges 
faced by Anganwadi Centers, Anganwadi workers, and different States encompassing aspects 
such as infrastructure, staffing, training, community engagement, nutrition programs, 
healthcare services, and challenges faced by AWCs. The Committee feels that this study, being 
conducted meticulously and collaboratively, can serve as a foundational document for 
improved planning targeted and impactful interventions for further improving the functioning 
of AWCs, enhancing the lives of Anganwadi workers, and ultimately benefiting the 
communities they serve at large.  
Recommendation 
4. The Committee notes with concern the vacant positions in AWCs at various levels. Noting 
that inadequate availability of Anganwadi workers/staff in AWCs has been a continuing area of 
concern, and as informed the filling up is done by States, the Committee is of the view that since the 
overall onus of successful and effective implementation of the Scheme lies with the States, it is 
incumbent upon them to address such vacancy gaps. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may write to each of the States where the vacancy positions are high for taking suitable measures to 
ensure that vacancies are filled up at the earliest and also seek a time schedule from them as to by 
when the vacancies are likely to be filled. The Status report based on inputs by States be shared with 
the Committee for its perusal. 
(Para 3.1.20 ibid) 

28 
 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has time and again through sustained meeting pursued the matter with all the 
State/UTs to fill the vacancies. Further, the issue has also been taken up during the APIP meeting 
under Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 which have been held for the FY 2023-24. 
  The Ministry has informed that they have convened several meetings and outreach 
programmes besides APIP meetings in the last 4 years with States to discuss various issues including 
on human resource and infrastructure. 
Recommendation/Observation by the Committee 
The Committee is of the view that the overall onus of filling up the vacancies lies entirely 
with the States. The Committee, however, suggests that the Ministry should empower the 
States where vacant positions are high number, with the help of Technological and digital 
interventions along with some financial assistance support be provided to expedite the 
recruitment process. A nationwide portal can be launched for its regular assessment and status 
evaluation.  
Scheme for Adolescent Girls 
Recommendation 
5. The Committee noting the aims of the Scheme and its thrust on Adolescent Girls, recommends 
that aspects like awareness and promotion of Menstrual Hygiene, use and safe disposal of sanitary 
napkins, countering anaemia, career guidance, Vocational skill based training and other such areas 
which confront girls at that stage of their life and would be beneficial for their growth be suitably 
incorporated as components of the Scheme. 
(Para 3.3.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
The Scheme for Adolescent Girls (SAG) has been revised and subsumed under Saksham 
Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 during 2022-23. Under the revised Scheme, Adolescent Girls (AGs) in 

29 
 
the age group of 14-18 years are covered in Aspirational Districts including Assam; and all districts 
of remaining North Eastern States. 
Following are the components of the Scheme:- 
(i) Nutrition : Under this component, there is a provision for providing supplementary nutrition 
containing 600 calories, 18-20 grams of protein and micronutrients is provided to adolescent girls in 
the age group of 14-18 years for 300 days in a year.  
(ii)   Non Nutrition Component:   Under this component, there is a provision for providing IFA 
supplementation, Health check-up and Referral services, Nutrition & Health Education and Skill 
Training. 
A special campaign namely Kanya Shiksha Pravesh Utsav (KPSU) was launched on 07th 
March, 2022 to re-enroll out of school adolescent girls (OoS AG) in the age group of 11-14 years. 
KSPU is a joint initiative of Ministry of Women and Child Development and Ministry of Education. 
The main components of the scheme are Social mobilization & Awareness and Incentivization of 
Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) for Counselling and Referrals.              
This special campaign had an incentivization component for AWWs.  An Incentive of Rs. 
1000/- is to be provided to AWWs where the number of OOS AGs are more than 4 in number and 
Rs. 500/- where the number of OOS AGs are less than or equal to 4 in number.        
 AWWs identified the OoS AG and provided their details to CDPO. CDPO in association with 
Block Resource Centre (BRC) of Department of Education mapped all the identified OoSAG in 
PRABANDH portal. DoSEL, MoE made a provision in PRABANDH Portal for effective monitoring 
of OoSAG identified by AWWs by MWCD.            
    As per the final report dated 20.07.2023 of PRBANDH portal, a total of 1,44,107 out of 
School Adolescent girls (OoSAG) have been identified and mapped ( 48,265 by AWWs) in Prabandh 
portal.  Out of these identified 1,44,107 OoSAG girls, 1,00,786 girls have been re-enrolled into 
formal schooling. Further for smooth transitioning of re-enrolled girls, 83192 have been identified 
for Special training under Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan.  
Recommendation/Observation by the Committee 

30 
 
The Committee appreciates the various initiatives and components being covered under 
the Scheme. It also desires that specific initiatives taken on aspects like awareness and 
promotion of Menstrual Hygiene, use and safe disposal of sanitary napkins, countering 
anaemia, career guidance, Vocational skill based training and other such areas which confront 
girls at that stage of their life be further emboldened and a status Note be submitted for 
information and perusal of the Committee once ready 
 
VACANCY POSITIONS AND AUTOMONOUS BODIES 
Recommendation 
7. The Committee notes the vacant posts against the sanctioned strength in the Ministry and in 
autonomous bodies like NCPCR, CARA, NCW, NIPPCD etc. and the steps being taken to fill up the 
vacancies appears promising. The Committee recommends that proper monitoring be done so that 
the vacant posts get filled in time bound manner at the earliest. 
(Para 4.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
i. Ministry of Women and Child Development (Proper Secretariat)  
  The Ministry has informed that vacancy at various levels in the Ministry is being monitored 
at the senior level.  Regular correspondence (DO letters/ OMs) from Secretary/ Joint Secretary/ 
Deputy Secretary from this Ministry has been sent to Department of Personnel and Training for 
filling up the vacancies. The status of vacant posts in Ministry of Women and Child Development 
(Group A, B and C) is as under: 
  

31 
 
 
Sl. No. Post  Vacant 
Posts 
Method of recruitment Status 
i. Multi Tasking 
Staff 
39 By Staff Selection 
Commission (SSC) 
Requisition sent to SSC, the recruiting 
agency for recruitment of 37 posts. 
Response from SSC is awaited. Two 
posts are to be filled through 
compassionate appointment.  
II. Staff Car 
Driver 
[Ordinary 
Grade] 
1 Ordinary Grade: 
Deputation/Absorption 
failing which by direct 
recruitment. For Armed 
Forces Personnel: 
Deputation/ re-
employment. 
Department of Expenditure approved the 
revival of the post. The vacancy has 
been circulated for filling through 
deputation.  
iii. Staff Car 
Driver [Grade 
–II] 
1 Grade-II : Promotion Department of expenditure approved the 
revival of the post. The post will be 
filled after completion of DPC. 
iv. Despatch 
Rider 
3 By deputation/ 
absorption failing which 
by Direct Recruitment. 
For Ex-servicemen: 
Deputation/ re-
employment 
Out of three posts, one post is filled up 
by deputation. 
Regarding revival of two posts, D/o 
Expenditure approved one post only, 
which is now under circulation.  
 File is under submission for 
reconsideration of D/o Expenditure for 
revival of 2nd post. 
 
ii. National Commission for Protection of Child Right (NCPCR)  
With regard to NCPCR, the Ministry has informed that against the 6 vacancies in NCPCR, 
the advertisement for filling up the vacant posts in NCPCR were published on 7th October, 2022 in 
all the leading newspapers, as well as, regional newspapers with 5th November, 2022 as the last date 
for receipt of applications.  
2.  The interviews of all the eligible candidates were conducted on 5th and 6th February, 2023. 
The names of selected candidates, along with duly filled in proforma, were sent to DOP&T on 
14.2.2023 for ACC approval. The final selection has been made after approval of ACC .The 3 
candidates have been selected as Member, NCPCR. Out of them one has resigned.  

32 
 
 
 (b) For other posts in NCPCR:  
Classification of posts Steps taken to fill vacancies 
Group A 02 posts of PPS were circulated on 13/12/2022 and last date of receipt of applications 
was 26 /01/2023. These posts have been again circulated on 01/05/2023 and the last 
date of receipt of application is 29 /06/2023. 
For 02 posts of (Director-1 & Presenting Officer-l), no suitable candidates have 
become available despite circulating the posts on number of occasions. Since these 
posts are vacant over two years, they are to be treated as 'deemed abolished'. 
Group –B 
Gazetted 
01 vacant post of Accounts Officer was circulated to all Ministries/Departments on 
16/07/2021. 03 applications were received but none was found eligible. This post is 
still vacant as it fell vacant on 03/04/2019 and now falls under the category of 
'deemed abolished'. 
Another vacant post of Dy. SP, which has been vacant since 17/11/2010 could not be 
filled up for being treated as 'deemed abolished'. 
Group-B 
Non-
Gazetted 
Vacant post of Desk Officer was circulated to all Ministries/Department on 
16/07/2021. 02 applications were received but none of them was found eligible. 
Remaining 08 posts have been vacant for more than 02 years and are to be treated as 
'deemed abolished'. 
Group-C 08 posts of Peons have not been filled up in view of the facts that based on the 
recommendations of the 7th CPC, the posts of Peons have been stopped by the 
Central Government for recruitment. NCPCR has resorted to engage Peons through 
placement agency 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
iii. Central Adoption Resource Authority (CARA) 
The Ministry has informed that existing vacancies are earmarked for Recruitment through 
Deputation only. Continuous efforts are being made to fill up vacancies on deputation. Recently 3 
vacancies out of 12 vacancies in Group A category have been filled up.  
iv. National Commission for Women (NCW) 
The Ministry has informed that the posts lying vacant in National Commission for Women 
(NCW) are Member – 02, Sr. Research Officer- 01, Research Officer-01, Law Officer- 01, Assistant 
Law Officer- 01, Private Secretary- 07, Junior Hindi Translator – 01, Personal Assistant -01.  
National Commission for Women (NCW) has been issuing the vacancy notices to fill up 
these posts on deputation on Foreign Service Term basis from time to time except for 02 posts of 
Members who are to be nominated by Government of India but no suitable candidates were found. 
Recently, NCW has issued advertisement for filling up of the above mentioned posts.  
v. National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development (NIPCCD) 
NIPCCD has given the details of action points for filling up the vacancy which are as under:- 
i) The Institute had advertised 36 posts in different categories to be filled up by direct mode 
of recruitment in the year 2018-19 through EDCIL. However, MWCD vide its letter No. 
NIP-22/9/2019-NIP dated 16.04.2019 directed to keep the process of evaluation and 
declaration of result in abeyance till further orders. Later on, the entire process of 
recruitment was cancelled. It was advised to take up the matter afresh vide its MWCD 
letter dated 28.04.2020.  
ii) At present, the NIPCCD has 214 vacant posts. Out of sanction strength of 342, 158 posts 
are vacant for more than 02 & 05 years and the same are in the category of deemed to be 
abolished. An analysis of requirement of vacant posts has been done and some of the 
posts have been submitted to Ministry for revival. Remaining vacant posts are being filled 
up by absorbing released staff of CSWB and a few important positions are being filled up 
through deputation also.   
 

34 
 
Recommendation/Observation by the Committee 
The Committee notes the status of vacancies in the Ministry and its various bodies/ 
organizations and recommends that a detailed plan to monitor and speedily expedite the 
process of filling up of these vacancies be shared with the Committee. 
**** 
  

35 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT IS 
STILL AWAITED 
NIL 
 
**** 
  

36 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE (CHAPTER-III) 
SHAKSHAM ANGANWADI & POSHAN 2.0 
The Committee notes and appreciates the various steps being taken by the Ministry 
towards generating funding towards the building of AWCs. The Committee is of the view that 
formulating a set of guidelines by the Ministry in consultation and coordination with concerned 
stakeholders, for corporates to channelize their CSR funds into building Anganwadi Centers 
shall be an impactful initiative. These defined Guidelines will be helpful in creating clear, 
measurable parameters for the corporates to follow towards investing in building anganwadi 
centers and in allocating CSR funds that are in alignment with the interests of corporates, the 
Government, and local communities, thereby supporting the development and well-being of 
children and women across the nation. 
(Para 3.1.16) 
The Committee notes the position and suggests that the reasons put forth by the States 
can be discussed further with them for any remedial action before such AWCs are deemed 
surrendered for re-allocation to other States which are in need of AWCs. 
(Para 3.1.17) 
The Committee appreciates the various steps listed for improving the working condition 
of AWWs/ AWHs in terms of Honorarium, Leave, Promotion Avenues, provision for Uniform 
and smart phones etc. Further, the Committee reiterates its recommendation for conducting a 
comprehensive study through the National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child 
Development (NIPCCD) as it will provide invaluable insights into the status and challenges 
faced by Anganwadi Centers, Anganwadi workers, and different States encompassing aspects 
such as infrastructure, staffing, training, community engagement, nutrition programs, 
healthcare services, and challenges faced by AWCs. The Committee feels that this study, being 
conducted meticulously and collaboratively, can serve as a foundational document for 
improved planning targeted and impactful interventions for further improving the functioning 

37 
 
of AWCs, enhancing the lives of Anganwadi workers, and ultimately benefiting the 
communities they serve at large. 
(Para 3.1.19) 
The Committee is of the view that the overall onus of filling up the vacancies lies entirely 
with the States. The Committee, however, suggests that the Ministry should empower the 
States where vacant positions are high number, with the help of Technological and digital 
interventions along with some financial assistance support be provided to expedite the 
recruitment process. A nationwide portal can be launched for its regular assessment and status 
evaluation.  
(Para 3.1.20) 
SCHEME FOR ADOLESCENT GIRLS 
The Committee appreciates the various initiatives and components being covered under 
the Scheme. It also desires that specific initiatives taken on aspects like awareness and 
promotion of Menstrual Hygiene, use and safe disposal of sanitary napkins, countering 
anaemia, career guidance, Vocational skill based training and other such areas which confront 
girls at that stage of their life be further emboldened and a status Note be submitted for 
information and perusal of the Committee once ready 
(Para 3.3.4) 
VACANCY POSITIONS AND AUTOMONOUS BODIES 
The Committee notes the status of vacancies in the Ministry and its various bodies/ 
organizations and recommends that a detailed plan to monitor and speedily expedite the 
process of filling up of these vacancies be shared with the Committee. 
(Para 4.12) 
**** 
  

38 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
(EWCY&S)  
 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports (EWCY&S) met at 10:00 
A.M. on Tuesday, 12th December, 2023 in Committee Room No.2, A-Block, Parliament House 
Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
3. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
4. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
5. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
7.  Dr. T.R.Paarivendhar   
8.  Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
9. Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
10.Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
11.Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
12. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
13. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
14. Shri Ratansingh Magansingh Rathod 
15. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary                                                                                                                                                               
Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Ms. Aditi Chaudhary, OSD to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha 
Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 

39 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He 
then informed that the agenda for the meeting was to consider and adopt the two draft Action 
Taken Reports and one subject Report of the Committee which are as under: 
a) * * * 
b) * * * 
c) 359th Report on "Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Fiftieth Report on Demands 
for Grants 2023-24 of the Ministry of Women and Child Development". 
 
3.  The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid three draft Reports one by one and 
after a brief discussion, adopted the *, *  and 359th  Reports without any modification. 
4. The Committee further decided to present/lay the said Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament on Wednesday, 13th December, 2023 during the current winter Session of the 
Parliament. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri Vivek Thakur, Chairman of the 
Committee and in his absence, Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav, M.P. and in their absence Dr. 
Faiyaz Ahmad to present the said Reports in the Rajya Sabha. Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
Lavu, M.P. and in his absence, Dr. T.R.Paarivendhar, M.P. were authorized to lay the above 
mentioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. The Committee also authorized the 
Secretariat to correct patent errors and consequential changes in the said reports. 
5. * * * 
   6.   The meeting adjourned at 10:40 A.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                            A.K. Mallick  
     12 th December, 2023                                                                                               Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*  Pertains to other matter. 