    
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022 /Magha, 1943, (Saka)   
Report No 
334 
THREE HUNDRED AND         REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken Note on 311th Report of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on HRD on the Subject Khelo India Scheme 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on……......., 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020) 
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FOURTH   REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in its Three Hundred and Sixteenth 
Report on Issues Related to Safety of Women 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  4th February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  4th February, 2022) 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FOURTH   REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in its Three Hundred and Sixteenth 
Report on Issues Related to Safety of Women 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on   4th February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on  4th February, 2022) 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022/Magha, 1943, (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hindi Version of this publication 
is also available 

 
 
 
 
 CONTENTS  
  PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii) 
2. PREFACE (iii) 
3. ABBREVIATIONS (iv)-(v) 
4. REPORT 1-39 
 CHAPTER-I RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
2-20 
 CHAPTER-II RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
21-32 
 CHAPTER-III RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE COMMITTEE 
33-38 
 CHAPTER-IV RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
39 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS - AT A GLANCE 40 
6. 
7. 
MINUTES 
ANNEXURE 
41-42 
43-47 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & 
SPORTS 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th   September, 2021) 
 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri R. S. Bharathi  
3. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
4. * Ms. Sushmita Dev  
5. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad  
7. Shri K. C. Ramamurthy  
8. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
9. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
10. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Shri D. M Kathir Anand 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
16. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
17. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
18. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
19. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
20. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
21.  Shri Balak Nath 
22.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
23.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
24.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
25.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
26. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
27. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
28.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
29. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
30. Shri S. Venkatesan 
31. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
---------------------------------- 
* Nominated w.e.f. 27.09.2021 
 (i) 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri S. D. Nautiyal, Joint Secretary (LR) 
 Shri. A.K. Mallick, Director 
 Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
 Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
 Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
 Smt. Suman Khurana, Executive Officer 
 Shri  Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  

 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee o n 
Education, Women, Children, Youth a nd Sports, having been authorised by the Committee 
to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Thirty Fourth 
Report of the Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Three Hundred and Sixteenth Report on the subject, “Issues related to 
Safety of Women”.  The Action Taken Notes were received from the Ministry of Women 
and Child Development vide their communication s dated the 20 th August, 2020, 16 th 
February, 28th June and 29th July, 2021. 
2. Three Hundred and Sixteenth Report of the Department-Related Pa rliamentary 
Standing Committee o n Education, Women, Children, Youth a nd Sports was presented to 
Rajya Sabha on 19th March, 2020 and simultaneously laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th 
March, 2020  and Replies of the Government to the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Report were considered by the Commi ttee at i ts meeting held on the  1st 
February, 2022. 
3.  The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting 
held on 1st February, 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
     NEW DELHI                                                                                    
      1stFebruary,2022                                                                                                                            
Magha/ 1943 (Saka)                                                               
 
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on   Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
ASP  Assistant Superintendent of Police 
BPR&D Bureau of Police Research and Development 
CAPT  Central Academy of Police Training 
CBSE  Central Board of Secondary Education 
CDTI  Central Detective Training Institute 
DoJ  Department of Justice 
DoSE&L Department of School Education and Literacy 
EC  Empowered Committee 
ER  Elected Representative 
ERSS  Emergency Response Support System 
EWR  Elected Women Representative 
FSL  Forensic Sciences Laboratories 
FTSC  Fast Track Special Court 
FY  Financial Year 
IG  Inspector General 
MHA  Ministry of Home Affairs 
MoHUA Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
MoPR  Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
MoR  Ministry of Railways 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MWCD Ministry of Women and Child Development 
NCERT National Council of Educational Research and Training  
NCRB  National Crime Records Bureau 
NGO  Non-Governmental Organisation 
OBC  Other Backward Class 
OM  Office Memorandum 
OSC  One Stop Centre 
 
(iv) 

 
 
 
POCSO Act The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 
PRI  Panchayati Raj Institution 
UT  Union Territory 
VC  Video Conference 
WHL  Women Helpline 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)  

1 
 
 REPORT 
This Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Committee 
on Education, Women, Children, Youth And Sports deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the reco mmendations contained in its 316 th Report on the subject “Issues related to S afety of 
Women”, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the table of Lok Sabha on 19th 
March, 2020. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of recommendations contained in above mentioned 
Report were received through the  Ministry of Women and Child Development  vide their 
communications dated 20th August, 2020 and 16th February, 28th June & 29th July, 2021. These 
have been categorized as follows.  
 Chapter I: Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
Paras - 73 I (i), 73 III (i), 73 III (ii), 73 III (iii), 73 III (iv), 73 III (v), 73 III (vi),      
73 III (vii), 73 III (viii), 73 III (x), 73 III (xii), 73 IV (i), 73 IV (ii), 73 IV (iii), 73 
IV (iv), 73 V (i) , 73 V (iv), 73 V (v) 
Total - 18 
Chapter II: Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
Government's replies:- 
Paras - 73 I (ii), 73 I (iii), 73 II (ii), 73 II (iii),  73 II (iv), 73 III (ix), 73 III (xi), 73 
IV (v), 73 IV (viii), 73 V (iii) 
Total - 10 
Chapter III: Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee:- 
Paras- 73 II (i), 73 IV (vi), 73 IV (vii), 73 V (ii) 
Total - 4 
       Chapter-IV: Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government is still awaited:- 
Paras- Nil 
  
 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee notes that a number of legislations have been framed for the welfare, 
security and benefits of women and also to eliminate gender -based bias, discrimination and 
violence against women. In spite of the legislative framework being in place, women continue to 
face severe forms of inequality, discrimination bias and violence which is a cause of grave 
concern for the Committee. As security and safety of women is of utmost priority, instances of 
violence against women indicate that the legislations are not being implemented in true letter and 
spirit. The Committee, accordingly, recommends for strict implementation o f the legislations 
relating to safety and security of women. 
[Para-73 I (i)] 
Action Taken  
MoWCD vide O.M. dated 20th August, 2020  has submitted that 'Police' and 'Public Order' 
are State subjects under the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India and  therefore, it is the 
primary duty of the State Governments to prevent, detect, register and take action on complaints 
related to  gender-based bias, discrimination and violence against women  and penalize the 
perpetrators responsible for such crime . The Min istry of Women and Child Development 
supplements the efforts of State Governments  through various Schemes such as Beti  Bachao Beti 
Padhao, One Stop Centre, Women Helpline etc.  In addition, the Ministry, from time to time, 
sensitizes all the States/UTs to ensure effective implementation of legislations meant for safety and 
wellbeing of women. 
MoWCD vide O.M. dated 16th February, 2021 has also conveyed that it also issues various 
advisories from time to time and has meetings/ video conferencing with State Governments/ UT 
Administrations to ensure strict implementation of Legislation.  An endeavor would be  made to 
create a rating system  for the States/ UTs on the count of women safety quotient in consultation 
with concerned stake holders. 

3 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT AND INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING 
Recommendation 
2. To address the crime against women in more effective manner, the Committee recommends 
that the Ministry of Home Affairs should set up women cells in all the police stations of the country 
with female police officers/staff, who are trained to handle cases related to gender based violence. 
This would increase the presence of women in the police force and the victims of sexual violence 
would have the confidence to enter the police stations to lodge their  complaints. The Committee 
further recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should discuss the possibility of conducting 
special recruitment drives with the States to induct women in the police force to increase their 
presence at the ground level, whic h would help provide a sense of empowerment to the women 
especially in the rural areas. 
[Para-73 III (i)] 
Action Taken  
MoWCD vide O.M. dated 29th July, 2021 has conveyed that MHA has informed that it has 
released a total of Rs. 107.49 crores to States/UTs  for setting up of Women Help Desks in 10,749 
Police Stations across the country. MHA has also issued advisories from time to time advising 
States/ UTs for providing 33% reservation to women in police. 
Recommendation 
3. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should provide a 
single help-line number for registering all complaints and for seeking help in cases of safety of 
women related issues. This number should be prominently displayed at all railway stations, public 
transport and other public places. 
[Para-73 III (ii)] 
Action Taken  
MoWCD vide O.M. dated 29 th July, 2021  has conveyed that  MHA has informed that a 
single number ‘112’ Emergency Response Support System (ERSS) is now functional in 35 States/ 
UTs. 

4 
 
Recommendation 
4. The Committee took note of the submissions made by the Ministry of Home Affairs 
regarding setting up of forensic laboratories in the country. The Committee in this reference is of 
the view that a strong network of forensic laboratories is of utmost necessi ty as the forensic 
evidence is of crucial importance in convicting the offenders. Currently the conviction rate is only 
32% as against filing of chargesheets in 86.6% rape cases. The Committee therefore recommends 
that Ministry of Home Affairs should setup  one forensic laboratory in every state in the country in 
every state capital within 2 years time. This would help the prosecution in building a strong case 
against the offenders as with the collection of evidence the conviction rate would certainly go up. 
[Para-73 III (iii)] 
Action Taken  
MoWCD vide O.M. dated 29th July, 2021 has conveyed that MHA has informed that as per 
information available with them, Forensic Sciences Laboratories (FSLs) have been setup in 32 
States/UTs. In remaining 4 UTs of Chandigarh, Daman Diu Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep 
and Ladakh, police utilize the foresnsic sciences facilities available in their neighbouring States or 
in the Central Forensic Sciences Laboratories. Further, strengthening of capacities in the Forensic 
Sciences Laboratories for dealing with cases on crimes against women, though a State  subject, is a 
high priority activity for MHA. As a multi -pronged strategy towards timely and effective 
investigation, MHA has initiated a series of measures and programs, including strengthening / 
modernization of State / Central Forensic Sciences Laboratories. 
Recommendation 
5. The Committee took note of the Ministry of Home Affairs ‘Safe City Proposal’ for 8 cities. 
In this regard the Committee feels that this is highly inadequate as there is a need to develop safe 
cities across the country. The Country has already identified and is working on making 100 smart 
cities. Committee recommends that Ministry of Home Affairs should integrate safe city plan within 
Ministry of Urban Development for all the 100 smart cities. In addition to this the Ministry of 
Home Affairs should also expand this project and cover all States including both rural and urban 
areas and design. 
[Para-73 III (iv)] 

5 
 
Action Taken  
MoWCD vide O.M. dated 29 th July, 2021 has conveyed that MHA has informed that Safe 
City Projects are comprehensive and integrated projects developed by the Police and/ or Municipal 
Corporations of the city, in keeping with the demands of their women residents and to plug any 
gaps in existing infrastructure. Safe City Projects guidelines provide for integra tion with other 
schemes including the Smart City Scheme, wherever, applicable.  
Recommendation 
6. The Committee notices that there is no comprehensive law for the prevention of Trafficking 
of persons and Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 does not define trafficking 
comprehensively. The Committee recommends that the Government of India should establish a 
National Anti -Trafficking Bureau having police officers, NGOs, and other stakeholders and it 
should have powers to investigate cases involving two or more States. The Committee further 
recommends that the Bureau should also have power to co -ordinate with international law 
enforcement agencies and formulate measures for combating and prevention of trafficking in 
children & women. 
[Para-73 III (v)] 
7. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry and Government should have "Anti -
Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee" for providing relief and rehabilitation services to 
the victims of trafficking. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry and the 
government should support welfare and rehabilitation of victims and provide them support for 
their skill development and vocational training and also create community based programmes 
with specialized professional like Counselors, Translat ors, Social Workers, Mental Health Care 
Professionals and other vocational trainers for reintegrating them into the society. 
[Para-73 III (vi)] 
 
Action Taken  
MoWCD vide O.M. dated 20th August, 2020 has informed that a Bill to comprehensively 
deal with trafficking of persons was introduced by the Government during the Monsoon Session of 

6 
 
Parliament in 2018.  The said Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha on 26 th July, 2018.  However, the 
Bill could not be consid ered in the Ra jya Sabha and it  lapsed upon dissolution of 16 th Lok 
Sabha.  The Bill has been revisited to make it more organised and effective.  The recommendations 
of the Committee have been noted for taking  appropriate action. The new Bill is  to be placed for 
kind consideration of the Houses of Parliament in accordance with established procedure.  
MoWCD vide O.M. dated 16 th February, 2021  has informed that t he suggestions of the 
Committee have been noted for appropriate action. 
Recommendation 
8. While taking note of the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways submissions the 
Committee took notice of the fact that multiple agencies/authorities are involved across states for 
managing public transport. Hence, there is a need for a unified law for governing public transport 
in the country. Transport Department of e ach state needs to co-ordinate with the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways so far as providing safety features in public transport in concerned. A 
special cell could be created to receive and deal with emergency situations. 
[Para-73 III (vii)] 
Action Taken  
This Ministry is coordinating with respective transport authorities of States/UTs in helping 
them establish Monitoring Centres for tracking of public service vehicles and handling emergency 
alerts through panic button and their further redressal thr ough ERS of the concerned State s/UTs. 
This is being do ne by administering the scheme “ Development, Customization, Deploy ment and 
Management of State -wise Vehicle Tracking Platform for Safety & Enforcement with AIS 140 
specifications under Nirbhaya Fund”. 
Recommendation 
9. The Committee noticed that only some States have proposed for CCTV surveillance, 
panic button and controllers in public transport to make road transport safe for women. However, 
there is no unified data available to access as to which ext ent these features have been 
implemented in reality. The Committee is of the opinion that these proposals are a step in the right 
direction for ensuring safety of women and accordingly recommends that the Union Ministry of 

7 
 
Road Transport and Highways shoul d frame a unified policy for mandatory installing of CCTV 
surveillance, panic button and controllers in public transport across the country in a time bound 
manner. 
[Para-73 III (viii)] 
Action Taken  
 This Ministry had notified Rule 125H in the Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989, Provision 
of vehicle location tracking device and emergency button is stipulated in this Rule, vide G.S.R 
(1095 (E) dated 28.11.2016. Further, vide S.O 5453 (E) dated 25.10.2018, the overall approach for 
installation of vehicle location tracking device and emergency button on public service vehicles 
and their integration with VAHAN database was released. However, while majority of States/UTs 
have not been able to set -up the Monit oring Centres, some have taken steps to install CCTV and 
panic button in buses. This Ministry has taken the initiative to administer the scheme 
"Development , Customization, Deployment and Management of State -wise Vehicle Tracking 
Ploatrorm for Safety & Enforcement with AIS 140 specifications under Nirbhaya Fund" , wherein 
requisite funds and technical help is being provided to States/UTs to set up these Monitoring 
Centres. 
Recommendation 
10. The Committee notices that there is no mechanism to register the i ncidents of sexual 
harassment and violence in trains. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Railways in 
coordination with Ministry of Home Affairs should set up a mechanism to lodge the case in the 
train itself. The Committee further adds that the Railways should setup complaint centres at each 
station. 
[Para-73 III (x)] 
Action Taken  
MoWCD vide O.M. dated 29 th July, 2021 has conveyed that MHA has informed that 
Railways have a dedicated helpline 139 where incidents of sexual harassment or crimes against 
women can be reported. This is being integrated by Ministry of Railways with 112 ERSS. 
Recommendation 

8 
 
11. While agreeing with the anguish and view points of the NGOs working in the field of 
Women safety, the Committee recommends that gender sensitization drives must be made a 
regular feature in urban and rural areas; gender sensitization should be made an integral part of 
the school curriculum from a very early age; equal attention should be given to women safety 
issues in urban and rural are as; safe cities, safe transport and safe working environment should 
be provided for women both in rural and urban areas; more shelter homes should be opened near 
hospitals; cities must have better infrastructures such as better lighting at blind spots, mor e police 
patrolling at deserted areas and training in self defense and physical fitness in women to deal with 
any grave situation. 
[Para-73 III (xii)] 
Action Taken 
MoWCD vide their O.M. dated 29 th July, 2021 had conveyed  that the mentioned 
recommendations concern Department of School Education & Literacy, Ministry of Home Affairs,  
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways  and Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs. However, the 
Ministry of Women & Child Development fully appreciate the concerns of  the Committee for 
Gender sensitization drives and its inclusion in school curriculum, equal attention to women safety 
in urban and rural areas, safe cities, safe transport and safe working environment for women, need 
for more shelter homes near hospitals,  better infrastructure for cities with better lighting at blind 
spots, more police patrolling at deserted areas, training in self defense and physical fitness in 
women to deal with any grave situation. Ministry has taken up the matter with the above 
mentioned Ministries/Departments for implementation of the recommendations of the Committee 
and furnishing the ATRs directly to Rajya Sabha Secretariat under intimation to the MWCD vide 
DO letter dated 16.07.2021.  
In the meanwhile, in this context vide the O.M. dated 29th July, 2021, MHA has informed 
through MoWCD that Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) conducts regular 
training programmes, including gender sensitization modules. States/ UTs have been advised to 
utilise these programmes. BPR&D und ertakes training of Investigation Officers, Prosecutors,  
Judicial Officers. A series of webinars were organised during the pandemic on issues relating to 
Soft Skills, Community Policing, Role of Intelligence and Safety of Women and Children, under 
the broad head of ‘Road to Effective Policing’. BPR&D has issued Standard Operating Procedures 

9 
 
(SOPs) for investigation of Assault on Women, including POCSO cases, creating and augmenting 
Women Help Desk in Police Stations across India. BPR&D has also released a Handbook for First 
Responders and Investigators in the Police. Further, as regards the better lighting at blind spots, 
more police patrolling at deserted areas, training in self -defence, MHA has also issued advisories 
to States Governments and Union Territories from time to time. 
MoHUA vide their O.M. dated 3rd August, 2021 has informed that they have issued an 
advisory dated 28.07.2021 to the Principal Secretary (UD/LSG) of all the States/UTs  regarding 
better lighting at blind spots, more police patrolling at deserted areas and training in self-defence. 
DoSE&L vide their O.M. dated 1 st October, 2021 has informed that they are implementing 
the scheme of Samagra Shiksha , an overarching programme for the school education sector 
extending from pre -school to cla ss 12. Bridging gender and social gaps at all levels of school 
education is one of the major objectives of the Samagra Shiksha. The Scheme aims to have gender 
sensitive, non-discriminatory classrooms free of any bias on the grounds of class, gender, caste or 
community so that all children learn confidently through healthy inter -personal relationships 
between learners and teachers. 
Samagra Shiksha supports the States and UTs in implementation of the RTE Act, 2009, as 
amended from time to time. As per the Act, Schools have to constitute a School Management 
Committee (SMC) consisting of the elected representatives of the local authority, parents or 
guardians of children admitted in the school and teachers. 50% of the members of the SMC are 
required to be women. 
Special State specific Projects such as Life Skills, Awareness programmes, Incinerators, 
Sanitary Pad Vending Machines etc. for varied interve ntions under equity are emphasized under 
Samagra Shiksha  for enhancing access, retention and quality for girl students by promoting 
enrolment drives, retention and motivation camps, gender sensitization modules etc. 
Under NISHTHA, a nation -wide integrated teacher training program for elementary 
teacher under Samagra Shiksha ; teachers are trained for relevance of Gender Dimensions in 
Teaching and Learning Process which helps teachers to use and adopt learning activities that foster 
gender sensitive classroom environment. NCERT has developed a module on Relevance of Gender 
Dimension in Teaching Learning Process and conducted training of KRPs from different States of 
India. 

10 
 
As per the provision of Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, 
Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013, DoSE&L has requested to all States & UTs, KVS, NVS, 
CTSA and CBSE to constitute separate Grievance Redressal Committee and Internal Complaint 
Committee vide letter No. 13-2/2019-IS-II(Pt.-III) dated 30.08.2020. 
Self-Defence training for girls is an activity under Samagra Shiksha. To empower girls to 
tackle risk of assault and for boosting their self confidence, Self defence training is imparted to 
girls of class VI to XII belonging to Government Schools. Fund for this purpose is p rovided for 
three months @ ₹3000/- per school per month for inculcating self-defence skills including life skill 
for self protection and self-development among the girls. Self defence training is als being given in 
Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs). 
School Health Programme  under Ayushman Bharat is a joint collaborative initiative of 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of Education. A module on Gender Equality 
for Health and Wellness in School for adolescent children has been developed by NCERT under 
the initiative. KRPs from different States of India have been trained on the above module. 
National Council of Educational Research and Training ( NCERT), an autonomous body 
under the Ministry of Education, has developed tools for textbook evaluation for analysing 
textbooks from the view point of gender bias and stereotypes. The present syllabi and textbooks 
developed by the NCERT across subject areas and classes promote sensitivity towards gender 
issues and empower children to raise their voices against gender stere otyping. The textbooks of 
Mathematics, Environmental Studies and Languages of the Primary Stage; and Social Science and 
Science textbooks of Upper Primary and Secondary Stages have portrayed contribution of women 
in various aspects. Other issues like equal ity, understanding gender, diversity and discrimination, 
people as resource, gender, religion and caste etc. have also been integrated. 
NCERT has been working for gender sensitization of various stakeholders at all stages of 
schools education. In all its c apacity building programs there are sessions related to socialization 
practices, gender related violence, laws for sexual harassment in schools of girls, self -defence 
techniques for girls, portrayal of gender in media, adolescence education and growing up concerns 
and gender issues in curriculum, textbook and pedagogy. NCERT  is regularly conducting 
sensitization programs on gender issues focussing on removing gender stereotyping from various 

11 
 
spaces i.e. home, school, classroom, workplaces, among others. The se programs include sessions 
on stereotyped role expectations and work distribution and its reversal in a significant manner. 
NCERT regularly designs and conducts research, development and training programs 
aiming at building a gender equal society and rem oving gender stereotyping. As a result of its 
continued advocacy, a paper on ‘Gender, School and Society’ has been introduced in the B.Ed. 
curriculum as a core paper at the national level. 
NCERT has developed training material for teacher educators on Gend er Equality and 
Empowerment – Vol. I: Perspectives on Gender and Society Vol. II; Gender and Schooling 
Processes Vol. III: Gender and Women’s Empowerment. These volumes are widely disseminated 
by NCERT in all its programmes and its softcopies are available on NCERT’s website. 
An online course on gender sensitization is being developed by NCERT which will include 
modules like – Socialization and Cultural Conditioning in the Indian Context, Gender Violence 
and Laws for Safety and Security of Girls and Women and Adolescence Education and Growing 
up Concerns. 
ROLE OF EDUCATION IN SOCIETAL TRANSFORMATION 
Recommendation 
12. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Human Resource Development is the only 
Ministry which can help inculcate the values of respect and dignity towards women to the next 
generation which will lead to change of mindset of people and eventually lead to safety of women. 
[Para-73 IV (i)] 
13. The Committee is of the opinion that violence against women indicates degrading moral 
values of the society arising out of deep rooted patriarchal mindset and feels that the steps taken 
by the Ministry to incorporate moral values in the school text books a re insufficient. On one hand 
we are trying to empower girls and on the other hand we are failing to teach the values of respect 
and dignity towards women in the boys. The Committee examined the school books of NCERT and 
prescribed books of CBSE and noticed  that they do not have enough chapters expressly 
inculcating moral values. The Committee accordingly recommends inclusion of chapters on moral 
values in the school curriculum and textbooks.  

12 
 
[Para-73 IV (ii)] 
Action Taken 
MoWCD vide their O.M. dated 29 th July, 2021 has submitted that the recommendations at 
this para concern Department of School Education & Literacy and Department of Higher 
Education under Ministry of Education. However, the Ministry of Women & Child Development 
fully appreciates the conce rns of the Committee for inclusion of chapters on moral values in the 
school curriculum and textbooks. Ministry has taken up the matter with the Ministry of Education 
for implementation of the recommendations of the Committee and furnishing the ATRs direct ly to 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat under intimation to the MWCD vide DO letter dated 16.07.2021. 
Department of Higher Education vide O.M. dated 5 th August, 2021 has  informed that the ATR 
would be given by Department of School Education & Literacy, Ministry of Education. 
Department of School Education & Literacy vide O.M. dated 1 st October, 2021 has stated 
that National Education Policy, 2020 has recommended to include in the curriculum ethical 
reasoning, Indian values and all basic human and Constitutional values (such as seva, ahimsa, 
swachchhata, satya, nishkam karma, shant i, sac rifice, tolerance, diversity, pluralism, righteous 
conduct, gender sensitivity, respect for elders, respect for all people and their inherent capabilities 
regardless of background, etc). 
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT), al so advocates 
value/peace education as a holistic, integrated and whole school approach. NCERT has developed 
curriculum, syllabi, textbooks and other curricula r materials for elementary and secondary stages, 
integrating different aspects of value education and at the same time providing adequate space to 
study the contents of different subjects. Values have been integrated in textbooks across 
subjects/stages. 
Teachers need to actively reinforce values appropriately while teaching lessons. NCERT 
textbooks contain guidelines for teachers to transact subject matter in ways which focus on values. 
Teacher training programmes on education for values and development of guidelines for schools to 
implement education for values have been organized to enhance the value orientation of techers 
and for utilization of opportunities latent in the curriculum. An online course in val ue education is 
being prepared by NCERT for teachers/teacher educators. 

13 
 
Recommendation 
14. For this purpose, Ministry should also hold regular workshops and organize participatory 
discussion with the students to inculcate the correct values in them and also make them aware 
about the institutional framework available in case of any gender based violence and crime. 
[Para-73 IV (iii)] 
Action Taken 
MoWCD vide their O.M. dated 29 th July, 2021 has submitted that the recommendations at 
this para concern Department of School Education & Literacy and Department of Higher 
Education under Ministry of Education. However, the Ministry of Women & Child Develop ment 
fully appreciate the concerns of the Committee for holding regular workshops with students to 
inculcate the correct values in them to make aware about the institutional framework available in 
case of any gender based violence and crime. Ministry has taken up the matter with the Ministry of 
Education for implementation of the recommendations of the Committee and furnishing the ATRs 
directly to Rajya Sabha Secretariat under intimation to the MWCD vide DO letter dated 
16.07.2021. 
The Department of Higher Education vide its O.M. dated 5 th August, 2021 has informed 
the Committee that the UGC has uploaded an advisory dated 25 -6-2020 on UGC website which 
has been sent to the Vice Chancellors of all the Universities for conducting Webinars/Video 
Conferences on Gender Bias and Stereo-typing Gender Equality and Women's Right with UGC in 
view of Covid-19. 
It was further informed that UGC has also launched SAKSHAM portal (i.e. saksham.ac.in) 
for grievance related to women and sexual harassment. The following initiat ives have been taken 
by UGC under this portal: 
i. UGC has notified UGC (Prevention Prohibition and Redressal of Sexual Harassment of 
Women Employees and Students of Higher Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2015, 
which being statutory in nature, are bindi ng on Universities and Colleges (available on 
UGC website i.e. www. ugc.ac.in) 
ii. UGC has set up Toll free No. 1800 -111-656 for registration of grievances related to 
Women and sexual harassment.  
iii. UGCV has issued following advisories to the Vice -Chancellors of all the Universities (all 
advisories available on UGC website i.e. www.ugc.ac.in and sakasham.ugc.ac.in) 

14 
 
iv. Annual return on cases of Sexual harassment UGC sends advisory since in a year to the 
Vice-Chancellors of all the Universities with the request to sen d the information regarding 
Annual Return on cases of Sexual Harassment yearly and to constitute an Internal 
Complaint Committee and also inform the same to your affiliated colleges with request to 
fill an online compliance of Gender Audit at SAKSHAM web p ortal. Latest  advisory has 
been uploaded on 10-6-2021 for the year 2020-21 
v. To implement the guidelines of Gender Champions. UGC sends advisory once in a year to 
the Vice-Chancellors of all the Universities with the request to implement the guidelines of 
Gender Champions and also inform the same to your affiliated colleges with request to fill 
an online compliance  of Gender Champion at SAKSHAM web portal. Last advisory has 
been uploaded on 29-09-2020 for the year 2019-20 and latest advisory for the year 2020-21 
is under process.  
 
All IIMs have Internal Complaint Committee (ICC) to handle cases of any gender based 
violence and crime and ICC of concerned Institute conduct annual workshops to create awareness 
among students, faculty and staff members. Relevan t information is disseminated through the 
institute's website as well.  
The Department of School Education & Literacy vide its O.M. dated 1 st October, 2021 has 
stated that NCERT has been carrying out gender sensitization programmes for various 
stakeholders. In its capacity building programs there are sessions related to socialization practices, 
gender related violence, laws for safety and security of girls and self -defence techniques for girls. 
In these programs, special care is taken to involve both male a nd female participants as it is 
important to sensitize males to confront patriarchy and stereotypes. Besides these, sessions also 
include cybercrime and POCSO Act. 
Training material for teacher educators on Gender Equality and Empowerment in three 
volumes has been developed by NCERT. Vol. I has a module on “Gender and Violence” and Vol. 
III has a module on “Protecting the Right of Girls and Women: The Legal Framework”. These 
volumes are widely disseminated by NCERT in all its various programmes  and its cof tcopy is 
available on NCERT’s website. 
An online course on Gender Issues in Education is being developed by NCERT with 
modules like – Socialization and Cultural Conditioning in the Indian Context, Gender Violence 

15 
 
and Laws for Safety and Security of Girls a nd Women and Cyber Safety and Security which will 
seek to address cyber-crimes against women among others etc. 
NCERT has developed training material for Teachers/Educators on ‘Inclusion of 
transgender children in school education’ for sensitization on transgender concerns. 
The Adolescence Education Programme (AEP) of NCERT helps empowering adolescents 
to understand and challenge stereotypes, inequalities and discrimination related to gender, 
including sex ratio and sex selective abortion. Further it also en courages understanding and 
reporting of sexual abuse and violence specially related to girls and women. 
Recommendation 
15. The Committee also urges the Ministry to make the Universities and Colleges more pro -
active to generate awareness about the responsibility of the citizen to make our cities safe for the 
women. The Universities/Colleges should organise camps in their respective areas to help 
generate awareness among the people and also the students about the legislative measures 
available to women for their safety. 
[Para-73 IV (iv)] 
Action Taken 
MoWCD vide their O.M. dated 29 th July, 2021 has submitted that the recommendations at 
this para concern Department of Higher Education under Ministry of Education. However, the 
Ministry of Women & Child D evelopment fully appreciate the concerns of the Committee for 
making the Universities and Colleges more pro -active to generate awareness about the 
responsibility of the citizen to make out cities safe for the women. Ministry has taken up the matter 
with the Ministry of Education for implementation of the recommendations of the Committee and 
furnishing the ATRs directly to Rajya Sabha Secretariat under intimation to the MWCD vide DO 
letter dated 16.07.2021. 
 
The Department of Higher Education  vide its O.M. dated 5 th August, 2021 has informed 
the Committee that UGC has uploaded on advisory dated 19-04-2020 on UGC website  (i.e. www. 
ugc.ac.in) regarding WOMEN SAFETY  and requested Universities and its affiliated colleges to 
take the following steps:-  

16 
 
To add more content in curriculum in addition to gender sensitization about leadership, 
sacrifices and the remarkable role placed by women in all walk of life in order to create a feeling 
of respect for women and help in addressing the negative mindset/ stereotyp es that exist in society 
and to organize online lectures and webinars on "Women Safety" to make the general public aware 
of the dignity and respect of women.  
IIMs undertake projects on responsible citizenship including women and child safety which 
students can take up e.g. "Make a Difference Project initiative of IIM Trichy, Women's 
Empowerment Cell at IIM Visakhapatnam.  
EFFECTIVE UTILIZATION OF NIRBHAYA FUND 
Recommendation 
16. The Committee understands that a victim of gender based violence faces  hurdles at every 
level, be it the filing of a police case, getting the medical examination done and also having to 
handle the social stigma involved. The Committee recommends that one police officer should be 
ear-marked in every police station to handle su ch cases and he should be trained for handling the 
victims of gender based violence in a more humane and compassionate manner. 
[Para 73 V(i)] 
Action Taken 
 MoWCD vide their O.M. dated 20 th August, 2020 has submitted that Empowered 
Committee (EC) of officers under the Framework for Nirbhaya Fund has appraised and 
recommended a proposal of M/o Home Affairs (MHA) for 'Setting up/strengthening Women Help 
Desks in Police Stations in all States & UTs (covering 10,000 Police Stations). As informed by 
MHA, an amount of ₹100.00 Crore has been released to the States/UTs for its implementation.  
Ministry of Home Affairs vide their D.O. letter dated 16 th June, 2021 has stated that , the 
States/UTs were advised vide their advisory dated 4th September, 2009 to ensure that 33% of 
police forces consist of women. This has been reiterated by MHA in its advisory dated 22 nd April, 
2013 and 12th May, 2015. 
In cases of UTs, MHA vide its order dated 26th March, 2015 has mandated 33% reservation 
for women horizontally and  in each category (Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe, OBCs and 

17 
 
others) in all direct recruitment in non -Gazetted posts from Constable to Sub -Inspector in the 
police forces of UTs, including Delhi Police.   
In order to facil itate the States/UTs to set up/ strengthen the Women Help Desks in Police 
Stations, the Ministry of Home Affairs has released a sum of ₹100 crores in March, 2020.  
The objectives of Women Help Desk includes; 
(i) Make the Police Stations more women friendly and approachable; 
(ii) The Women Help Desk will be the first and single point of contact for any 
woman walking into a police station; 
(iii) The officials of Women Help Desk will be trained to manage matters related 
with crimes against women being registered in the police station 
Further, as a measure of capacity building in the police forces, the Bureau of Police 
Research & Development (BPR&D) is regularly conducting training programmes for police 
officials on gender sensitivity in dealing with crimes against women cases.   
The Training Division of the BPR&D has conducted a widely participated webinar on 9 th 
June, 2020, on ‘Safety of Women and Children during pandemic’ in which nearly 1500 Police 
Officers of all ranks from all over the country participated.  
The Training Division of t he BPR&D also conducted an online training event - National 
Police Perspective Management Course  - for Police Officers from States/UTs/Central Armed 
Police Forces/ Central Police Organizations of the rank of ASP to IGs during which an exclusive 
session was devoted to Policing for Women & Children.  
The BPR&D, in association with the States/UTs and their Police Academies organized 260 
training courses for Investigators on Women Safety in which 6659 police officers were trained. 
Similarly, 49 courses were orga nised for Public Prosecutors in which 1245 officers received 
training. 
In all, a total of 7904 officers were trained in the FY 2018 -19 & 2019-20. The trainings are 
continuing for the FY 2020 -21 and the BPR&D plans to conduct 180 courses for 4500 police 

18 
 
officers and 20 courses for 500 Public Prosecutors. During this year, States/ UTs have already 
conducted 11 courses and trained 370 police officers despite the pandemic.  
A total of 100 domestic courses were conducted by the outlying units of the BPR&D 
(CDTIs & CAPT) on Crime against Women and Children, Training of Trainers on Women Safety 
and Investigation of Rape Cases. In all, 2035 officers of all ranks from all over the country were 
trained in FY 2018-19 and 2019-20 during these training events. 
MoWCD vide their O.M. dated 16th February, 2021 has submitted EC reviews the progress/ 
status of the implementation of the appraised projects/ schemes on regular basis in conjunction 
with the concerned Ministries/ Departments for ensuring proper and productive utili zation of 
Nirbhaya Fund. However, suggestions of the Committee for taking initiative and help of Cabinet 
Secretariat as well as NITI Aayog for proper and productive utilization of Nirbhaya Fund have 
been noted for taking appropriate action. 
The Empowered Committee, under Nirbhaya Fund , in its meeting held on  13th January, 
2021 has advised the representative of MHA to undertake a feedback exercise in respect of all 
major cities in the country by involving local communities, police, NCRB, psychologist etc. to 
assess the overall scenario regarding women safety and also what needs to be d one so as to 
formulate schemes/ programmes from Central Government level instead of waiting for the 
proposals from States. 
The EC has also decided that the proposals received from States/UTs in the following areas 
may be considered by the EC: 
(i)  Projects/ schemes for self defence training of female employees working in un -
organised sectors; 
(ii)  Projects/ schemes for self defence training of girls in educational institutions , where 
funding support from other sources like M/o Education or State/ UT Government is not available; 
(iii) Projects/ schemes for training of women drivers on women safety in the major tourist 
places.  To begin with, M/o Tourism to identify 50 such citie s, where this initiative can be 
undertaken; 

19 
 
(iv)  Projects/ schemes for training on women safety for drivers of public transport in the 
major cities.   To begin with, M/o RTH to identify 50 such cities, where this initiative can be 
undertaken. 
Recommendation 
17. The Committee recommends that the One stop crisis centres should be set -up in each 
District of the country and counselors trained to handle victims of gender based violence should 
be associated with these centres. These counselors should help the victim in all their interactions 
at the hospital, police station etc. 
[Para-73 V (iv)] 
Action Taken 
MoWCD vide O.M. dated 20 th August, 2020 has stated that at least  1 (one), One Stop 
Centre is being set up in each district of the country.   As on 31st July, 2020, a total of 733 OSCs 
have been approved in 730 Districts.  Out of these, 683 OSCs have already been operationalized. 
Further, MoWCD vide O.M. dated 16 th February, 2021 has stated that as per the 
implementation guidelines, all OSCs have to f acilitate a range of services such as police 
facilitation, legal counseling, psycho -social counseling, medical aid and temporary shelter in an 
integrated manner, under one roof,  for violence affected women. T he Ministry submitted that t o 
facilitate these s ervices the implementation guidelines provide for a Centre Administrator, Case 
Worker, Police Facilitation Officer, Lawyer, Paramedic, Counsellor, IT staff, MTS and Security 
Guard.  The appointments are to be done by the concerned States/ Districts. The Mi nistry in all its 
meetings and video conferences takes up the  matter regarding provision  of adequate number of 
trained counsellors and other staff to facilitate services to the needy women approaching the OSCs. 
Recommendation 
18.   The Committee notes that  the pace of implementation of the projects funded from the 
Nirbhaya Fund is lethargic and needs to be fast -paced. This would help give the Fund the 
necessary importance and on the other hand help remove the administrative hurdles faced in the 
implementation of the schemes/projects, due to ineffective coordination between different 
Ministries and State Governments. The Committee recommends that a status of implementation of 

20 
 
the projects/ schemes under the Nirbhaya Fund should be overseen by a Committee unde r the 
Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary. 
[Para-73 V (v)] 
Action Taken 
MoWCD vide their O.M. dated 20 th August, 2020 has informed that EC reviews the 
progress/ status of the implementation of the appraised projects/ schemes on regular basis in 
conjunction with the concerned Ministries/ Departments for  expediting implementation of the 
projects/ schemes in a time -bound manner.  The recommendation regarding setting up of  a 
Committee under the chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary is under consideration. 
On a query of the Committee regarding the present status of setting up a Committee under 
the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary , the Ministry replied that the proposal is still under 
consideration.  
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
LEGISLATIVE FRMEWORK 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee further recommends strengthening of legislative measures by fixing a time 
frame for deciding cases of gender based violence against women. This needs strict 
implementation of existing laws so that time bound justice is delivered to women, filing of charge 
sheet in such cases within 30 days, denying bail to the accused and expediting the disposal of 
pending cases within 6 months’ time so that timely justice is imparted. 
[Para-73 I (ii)] 
Action Taken 
MoWCD vide their O.M. dated 16 th February, 2021 conveyed that Ministry of Home 
Affairs and Ministry of Law and Justice are to respond to this, as this issue relates to enforcement 
of criminal laws and procedure which falls under their domain.    
Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice vide its O.M. dated 5th November, 2020 
has stated that the issues relating to legislative measures does not relate to Department of Justice. 
The Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice vide its O.M. dated 5 th October, 
2020 has stated that  this Department is not administratively concerned with the above mentioned 
para in accordance with the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961.  
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) vide its OM dated 4th January, 2021 stated that ‘Police’ 
and ‘Public Order’ are State subjects under the Seventh Sched ule to the Constitution of India. The 
responsibilities to maintain law and order, protection of life and property of the citizens including 
crime against women and girls are with the respective State Governments. The State Governments 
are competent to deal with such offences under the extant provisions of law. The Government has 
enacted Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018 which, inter-alia, provides for completion of 
investigation in cases of sexual assault in two months, completion of trial in two months and 
appeals to be disposed in six months.   

22 
 
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018 also provides that the High Court or the Court of 
Session shall, before granting bail to a person who is accused of an offence triable under sub -
section (3) of section 376 or Section 376AB or section 376DA or section 376D B of the Indian 
Penal Code, give notice of the application for bail to the Public Prosecutor within a period of 
fifteen days from the date of receipt of the notice of such application.  
In order to facilitate Police in States/ UTs to comply with the Crimina l Law (Amendment) 
Act, the Ministry has issued advisories to States/UTs from time to time.  
The Ministry has also launched an online analytic tool “Investigation Tracking System for 
Sexual Offences” on 19 th February, 2019 to monitor and track police invest igations in two months 
in sexual offences as per Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018. Law Enforcement Officers can 
now monitor the progress at the level of Police Station. The progress in compliance to the law is 
being reviewed with the States/ UTs periodic ally, including in the Inter -State Zonal Council 
meetings.’ 
Recommendation 
2. The Committee is of the strong view that crime against women take place because society 
sees them in a n inferior position in the societal set -up. This is mainly because women are not 
represented in the decision making process. The Committee is of the opinion that women should be 
given a decisive role and positions of power in all spheres of society to chang e the mindset of the 
people and help provide role models to the next generation.  The Committee accordingly 
recommends that there is an urgent need to address this situation by making thirty -three percent 
reservations for women at all levels right from Panchayats to Parliament at the earliest. 
[Para-73 I (iii)] 
Action Taken 
MoWCD vide their O.M. dated 16 th February, 2021 conveyed that Department of Legal 
Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice may respond to this as the issue falls under their domain.  
Thereafter, MoWCD vide O.M. dated 28 th June, 2021 has conveyed that  Legislative Department, 
Ministry of Law and Justice vide OM dated 12 th November, 2020 has stated that “a Bill, namely, 
the Constitution (One Hundred and Eight Amendment) Bill, 2008 providing for reservation of one-
third seats for women in Lok Sabha and State Legislative assemblies including the Legislative 

23 
 
Assemblies of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, for a period of 15 years, was introduced in 
Rajya Sabha on 6 th May, 2008. The Ra jya Sabha passed the said Bill on 9 th March, 2010; but it 
could not be passed by the Fifteen Lok Sabha. The said Bill lapsed on dissolution of the fifteen 
Lok Sabha. 
Further, Gender justice is an important commitment of the Government and the issue 
involved needs careful consideration on the basis of the consensus among all political parties 
before a Bill for amendment in the Constitution is brought before Parliament. 
In so far as reservation in Panchayat and other local bodies is concerned, it is stated th at 
this subject matter is administratively concerned with Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs respectively.” 
Consequently, as suggested, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and Panchayati Raj 
were approached vide O.M. dated 7th December, 2020 for comments. Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs vide O .M. dated 14th December, 2020 stated that “Clause (3) of Article 243T of 
74th Constitutional Amendment Act provides “Not less than one -third (including the number of 
seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total 
number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Municipality shall be reserved for women 
and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Municipality”. Moreover, 
as per information available, some states such as Himachal Pradesh, Odisha, Puducherry, Punjab, 
Sikkim and Tripura have also made provision of fifty percent reservation for women in the Urban 
Local Bodies (ULBs).” 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) vide letter dated 5th November, 2020 has intimated that 
the Constitution ensures participation of women in Panchayats by reserving not less than one -third 
seats for them at each of the Panchay ats. On the continuous advocacy of the MoPR, twenty States 
have made provisions for reservation of fifty per cent of total seats for women in Panchay ats at 
levels in their respective States Panchay ats Raj Act. As on date out of around 31 lakhs Elected 
Representatives (ERs) of Panchayati Raj  Institutions (PRIs), there are around 14.50 lakh Elected 
Women Representatives (EWRs) which constitute around 46% of the total seats. This has led to 
substantial increase in the involvement and actives through active participation in Gram Sabha 
meeting fo r preparation of Gram Panchayats Development Plans. Beside MoPR has been 

24 
 
advocating for holding of separable Mahila Sabha meetings prior to Gram Sabha meetings 
enhancing the presence and participation of women in Gram Sabha and Panchayat meetings. 
Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice vide O.M. dated 5th October, 
2020 has stated that as per the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, this 
Department is not administratively concerned with the above mentioned para.  
LEGAL FRAMEWORK  
Recommendation 
3. The Committee notes that simple and accessible justice delivery system is a great deterrent 
to crimes against women because it provides courage to the victims to come out and file 
complaints against the perpetrators of the crimes. The Committee is however anguished to note 
that a number of States like Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh have still not 
given their concurrence for setting up Fast Track Special Courts. The Committee urges the 
Department of Justice  to pursue the matter with the concerned States to ensure that 1800 Fast 
Track courts become operational at the earliest. The Department should also look into the 
possibility of according legislative backing to setting up of Fast Track Courts on a permanen t 
basis. The Committee further recommends that Fast Track Special Courts should decide the matter 
within six months of such incident. 
     [Para-73 II (ii)] 
Action Taken 
MoWCD vide O.M. dated 29 th July, 2021 has submitted that the recommendations of this 
para concern Department of Justice (DoJ) under Ministry of Law & Justice as they are 
implementing the scheme for setting up of FTSCs in the country, under which funds are released 
to States/UTs for the purpose. H owever, the MoWCD  being duly aware of the concerns of the 
Committee for setting up of Fast Track Special Courts (FTSCs) on permanent basis and timely 
decision by FTSCs, has taken up the matter with the DoJ for implementation of the 
recommendations of the Committee and furnishing the ATRs direc tly to the Rajya Sabha 
Secretariat under intimation to the MWCD vide D.O. letter dated 16.07.2021. The Ministry will 
continue to follow up with concerned Department so as to create a safer and better ecosystem for 
women and girls to grow and prosper. 

25 
 
The Department of Justice vide O.M. dated 30 th September, 2021 has stated that out of 31 
eligible States/ UTs having pending cases 65 and above, 28 have given their consent for the 
scheme of FTSC including the states of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and Utter Prad esh. Consent of 
West Bengal, Arunachal Pradesh and Andaman & Nicobar Islands is yet to be received for which 
matter is being taken up at the level of Chief Minister of the State and Chief Justice of the High 
Court. There is an another scheme of Fast Track Courts (FTC), for dealing cases pertaining to 
women, children, senior citizen etc and cases pertaining to property disputes pending above 5 
years. Setting up functioning of such FTCs fall s within the domain of state governments in 
consultation with respective High Courts. As per information received from High Courts there are 
939 functional FTCs in the country (July, 2021). 
Recommendation 
4. The Committee took note that there are 1023 Fast Track Special Courts (FTSC) in 30 
States. The Committee further noticed that there is a skewed distribution of Fast Track Special 
Courts across States likes for example 18 in Andhra Pradesh, 218 in Uttar Pra desh, 14 in Tamil 
Nadu and 31 in Karnataka. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Law & Justice should 
have a balanced distribution of Fast Track Special Courts in States to expedite the disposal of 
cases and ideally there should be one FTSC within 500 km of radius.  
[Para-73 II (iii)] 
Action Taken 
 The Department of Justice vide their O.M. dated 30th September, 2021 has stated that in the 
scheme of FTSC, for each 165 pending cases, one court is provided. For such States/UT s where 
pending cases are below 165 but 65 and above, one court has been provided. Earmarking of 
FTSCs for the State s/UTs has been done as per pendency data related to rape and POSCO Act as 
on 31.03.2018. FTSCs have been earmarked in 31 States/UTs. Presentl y FTSCs are operational in 
27 States/UTs.  
Recommendation 
5. The Committee also urges the Department of Justice to look into the feasibility of changes 
in law to ensure no bail is granted to accused involved in heinous crimes against women. There 

26 
 
should be filing of chargesheet within 30 days of such a crime and time -bound investigation and 
conclusion of trial within a year’s time to provide timely justice. 
[Para-73 II (iv)] 
Action Taken 
MoWCD vide their O.M. dated 29th July, 2021 has submitted that the recommendations of 
this para concern Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) and Department of Justice (DoJ) under 
Ministry of Law & Justice. However, the Ministry of Women & Child Development fully 
appreciate the concerns of the Committee for c hanges in law to ensure no bail is granted to 
accused involved in heinous crimes against women, filling of charge -sheet within 30 days of such 
a crime and a time -bound investigation and conclusion of trial within a year’s time to provide 
timely justice to all the needy women and girls. Ministry has taken up the matter with the MHA 
and DoJ for implementation of the recommendations of the Committee and furnishing the ATRs 
directly to Rajya Sabha Secretariat under intimation to the MWCD vide DO letter dated 
16.07.2021. The Department of Justice vide its O.M. dated 30 th September, 2021 has stated that as 
per Allocation of Business Rules, 1961, subject related to Criminal Law, Criminal Procedure 
Code, Criminal offences against women, children etc pertain to Ministry of Home Affairs and 
hence MoWCD may take up this issue accordingly with the concerned Mini stry. MoWCD has 
conveyed that MHA has furnished certain information against this recommendation, which is as 
follows: 
(i) Completion of investigation and filing of charge sheet in rape cases in 2 months and 
trials shall also be completed in 2 months. 
(ii) Appeals against conviction or acquittal to be disposed of within 6 months. 
(iii) Anticipatory bail to the persons accused of rape or gang rape of a girl under 12/ 16 
years of age has been disallowed.  
(iv) If an accused applies for bail, a 15 days' Notice h as to be given to the Public 
"Prosecutor by the Court on the application of bail of the accused. The presence of the 
informant or any other person authorised by him shall be obligatory at the time of hearing 
of the application for bail to the person under sub-section (3) of section 376 or Section 
376A or Section 376DA or Section 376DB of the Indian Penal Code. 

27 
 
Further, amendments to the criminal justice system are an ongoing and continuous process. 
Further Ministry of Law & Justice have given assistance to States / UTs to set up fast Track 
Special Courts including exclusive POCSO (e -POCSO) Courts for quick disposal of cases of rape 
and under POCSO Act. 
INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT AND INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING 
Recommendation 
6. To further combat any crime and to take follow up action there is strong case for a 
creation of a data -base of the drivers, conductors, helpers and associated staff involved in public 
transport. Committee recommends that such data should be collected immediately which should be 
made digital and linked with the police stations for the ease of investigations. The name and other 
details of the driver and conductor should also be displayed on the concerned bus/taxi/auto etc. 
[Para-73 III (ix)] 
Action Taken 
 SARATHI is a flagship application under the e-Transport Mission Mode Project, facilitated 
for computerization of Driving License related services. The SARATHI database is readily 
accessible to all the States/UTs , which can utilize these to extracts the data as per their 
requirements. Further, this datab ase can be accessed by the Police and other emergency services 
based on their respective requirements. 
Recommendation 
7. The Committee took note of the fact that the Ministry of Railways has planned only two 
projects of Video Surveillance System at 983 stations and 67 stations of Konkan Railway, which is 
highly inadequate if safety of whole nation is being considered. Since Railways has more that 8500 
operational railway stations across the country with over 9200 trains operati ng daily, therefore, 
Committee recommends that such Video Surveillance System should be implemented at all the 
stations across the country. 
[Para-73 III (xi)] 
Action Taken 

28 
 
MoWCD vide their O.M. dated 29 th July, 2021 has submitted that the recommendations at 
this para concern Ministry of Railways (MoR). However, the Ministry of Women & Child 
Development fully appreciate the concerns of the Committee for implementation of Video 
Surveillance System at all the stations across the country. Ministry has taken up the matter with the 
MoR for implementation of the recommendations of the Committee and furnishing the ATRs 
directly to Rajya Sabha Secretariat under intimation to the MWCD vide DO letter dated 
16.07.2021. 
Ministry of Ra ilways vide its O.M. dated 12 th October, 2021 has informed the Committee 
that Railway have approved works for provision of CCTV at all stations except halt stations. 
CCTV based video Surveillance System has been provided at 814 Stations (till June 2021) to  
ensure safety of women.  
ROLE OF EDUCATION IN SOCIETAL TRANSFORMATION 
Recommendation 
8. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to urge more and more Universities and 
colleges to open Department of Women Studies so that the students of these Departments  can form 
groups to counsel and support distressed women. 
[Para-73 IV (v)] 
Action Taken 
MoWCD vide their O.M. dated 29 th July, 2021 has submitted that the recommendations at 
this para concern Department of Higher Education under Ministry of Education. Howe ver, the 
Ministry of Women & Child Development fully appreciate the concerns of the Committee for 
opening of Department of Women Studies at more Universities and Colleges. Ministry has taken 
up the matter with the Ministry of Education for implementation o f the recommendations of the 
Committee and furnishing the ATRs directly to Rajya Sabha Secretariat under intimation to the 
MWCD vide DO letter dated 16.07.2021. 
The Department of Higher Education vide its O.M. dated 5 th August, 2021 has informed 
that fresh proposals will be invited/ processed after the finalization of revised guidelines of women 
Studies. IIMs are specialized institutions offering management education through programs like 
MBA. They have been conducting Women leadership programmes to equip the participants to take 

29 
 
leadership roles in organizations. Some IIMs have set up Entrepreneurship Centres where a solid 
launch pad is provided to women entrepreneurs with diverse backgrounds and innovative start up 
ideas.  
Recommendation 
9. The Committee recommends that Public awareness programmes through press and media 
should be mandatorily conducted to educate public about laws in place for safety and security of 
women along with consequences for violating of these laws. Mindset change through Nukakad 
Natak, plays. Advertisement etc. to inculcate a share of responsibility and respect towards women 
should be adopted. 
[Para-73 IV (viii)] 
Action Taken 
MoWCD vide their O.M. dated 29 th July, 2021 has submitted that the recommendations at 
this para concern Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. 
However, the Ministry of Women & Child Development fully appreciate the concerns of the 
Committee for need of Public Awareness Prog rammes through press and media to educate public 
about laws in place for safety and security of women alongwith consequences for violating of 
these laws. Ministry has taken up the matter with the Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of 
Information & Broad casting for implementation of the recommendations of the Committee and 
furnishing the ATRs directly to Rajya Sabha Secretariat under intimation to the MWCD vide DO 
letter dated 16.07.2021.  
In the meanwhile, MHA has informed that the Government issued vari ous advisories to the 
States/Union Territories for strengthening measures for the safety and security of women and SC/ 
STs. These advisories, inter -alia, include sensitization and training of the police personnel/law 
enforcement agencies; programmes for cr eating awareness among vulnerable sections of the 
society, legal recourse open to them, adopting appropriate measures for swift and salutary 
punishment to public servants found guilty of neglect of duty; improving effectiveness of schemes 
for the welfare a nd rehabilitation of victims of crime, gender sensitization of police personnel, 
participation of general public/NGOs in women safety etc. 

30 
 
The Ministry of Information and Brroadcasting vide its O.M. dated 20 th October, 2021 has 
informed the Committee of the activities by Prasar Bharati which are as under:- 
Prasar Bharati through its constituents AIR & DD is engaged in its endeavor to plan and 
mount programmes concerning women, which include awareness programmes to educate public 
about the existing laws for safety, security, the rights and privileges available to women and 
initiatives taken by the government through various schemes to empower women, and give them 
safe and secure environment in society and at workplace. AIR & DD has made concerted efforts to 
produce these content driven programmes in the local dialect and language. The details are as 
follows:- 
i. All India Radio regularly broadcasts programmes on women, child & health which cover 
subject such as safety and security of women that generally aim at c reating social 
awareness on the issues relating to female foeticide, gender discrimination, awareness 
about the rights and privileges of women through the propagation of legal literacy . 
Different traditional folk forms are used in communicate with the rural audience.  
ii. AIR stations across the network have been regularly advised to give due publicity to the 
laws, rules, regulation and guidelines related to the Indecent Portrayal of Women in 
media and sensitize the public through positive portrayal of women . I n these 
programmes, information about the legal provisions and the remedies available under the 
existing laws and regulations on indecent portrayal of women is also being disseminated. 
Information about these programme broadcast are regularly shared with M inistry of 
Information and Braodcasting. Similarly stations across its network are also advised from 
time to time to give due publicity to the laws, rules, regulation and guidelines related to the 
sexual crimes against women and to broadcast programs in di fferent formats for creating 
mass awareness about the legal provisions and punishment for violation of such provisions 
as per the judicial pronouncements.  
iii. Instructions to all stations have also been issued for creating awareness and publicizing the 
campaign on "National Mission for safety of women' which covered diverse issues related 
to women and girl child and to keep special focus on programmes linked to women's rights 
and their safety on the lines of the recommendations received from National Human Rig hts 
Commission.  

31 
 
iv. Similarly, the News Services Divisions (NSD) of All India Radio and its 46 Regional News 
Units (RNUs) have taken several initiatives to educate the public on different issues related 
to women empowerment. It broadcasts programmes to create  awareness among women on 
gender equality. Wide coverage is given to events to mark BBBP/ Girl Child Day / 
International Women's Day in the news bulletins, news -based programmes and social 
media platforms in English, Hindi and Regional languages.  
v. On the occasion of International Women's Day 2021, NSD ran a special series highlighting 
the achievements of women in various fields. Special talk shows were organized on the 
theme # DeshkiBeti to discuss and recognize women achievers who have left their mark in 
a range of fields in connection with National Girl Child Day 2021. 
vi. Special Broadcast of 7 Unique stories highlighting them, "Women Entrepreneurship & 
Empowerment Initiative ' was done by NSD in August 2020 which aims at college going 
students to middle-aged housewives to embrace entrepreneurship as a viable and fulfilling 
career option.  
vii. Various channels of Doordarshan Network telecasts programmes for educating public 
about laws in place for safety and security of women along with the consequences for 
violating of these laws on regular basis. Doordarshan Network telecast panel discussion/ 
expert talk on various topics like women's rights, protection from child marriage, POCSO 
act, Legal aid services, Protection against domestic violence safety at work place, 
rehabilitation, and economic empowerment of women etc. from time to time.  
Further the details regarding the Press Release and other Social Media Activity done by 
PIB on issues related to the Safety of Women are given in Annexure-I. 
EFFECTIVE UTILISATION OF NIRBHAYA FUND 
Recommendation 
10. The Committee took a note that many of the states have not yet utilized the total funds 
allocated to them under One Stop Centers (OSC), Women Helpline (WHL) Schemes. The 
Committee further notices that only 20 to 30 perce nt of the fund has been utilized by majority of 
the States.The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Women and Child 

32 
 
Development should have direct meetings with the State Governments and UT administration 
quarterly to monitor the expenditure of funds on the above mentioned schemes. 
[Para-73 V (iii)] 
Action Taken 
MoWCD vide O.M. dated 20 th August, 2020 has stated that the Ministry regularly reviews 
the status of implementation of OSC and WHL schemes with the officials of States/ UTs through 
meetings and video conferencing. Besides, follow up action is also taken through telephone calls 
and e-mails.  Even during the lockdown  period and the crisis situation created due to COVID-19, 
Ministry has continued its follow up with the States/ UTs through VCs, telephone calls and using 
electronic media. 
Further, MoWCD vide O.M. dated 16 th February, 2021 has stated that as per the seventh 
schedule of the Indian Constitution, maintaining publi c order is a State subject and the  Ministry 
issues various advisories from time to time and have meetings/ video conferencing with State 
Government/UT Administrations to ensure strict implementation o f Legislation. However, in view 
of the suggestions  of the Committee, e ndeavour would be made to  create a rating systems for the 
States/ UTs on the count of women safety quotient in consultation with concerned stakeholders. 
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee is of the opinion that the these two Ministries i.e. Ministry of Law and 
Justice and Ministry of Home Affairs need to work in well coordinated manner because both are 
critical in providing institutional structure and justice delivery system. The quest for justice for 
Nirbhaya which is a blot on our collective conscience and the public hailing of police act ion in 
Hyderabad case echoes the sentiment of the society that the guilty be punished immediately. This 
is a call for introspection for both the Ministry of Law and Justice and Ministry of Home Affairs 
along with the associated law enforcement agencies as the system is not functioning to provide 
timely justice. Therefore, there is a need to bring about integrated changes at all levels in the 
entire system. 
[Para-73 II (i)] 
Action Taken 
MoWCD vide their O.M. dated 29 th July, 2021 has conveyed that MHA has informed that 
the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act 2018 provides for: 
(i) completion of investigation and filing of charge sheet in rape cases in 2 months and 
trials shall also be completed in 2 months. 
(ii) Appeals against conviction or acquittal to be disposed of within 6 months. 
(iii) Anticipatory bail to the persons accused of rape or gang rape of a girl under 12/ 16 
years of age has been disallowed.  
(iv) If an accused applies for bail, a 15 days' Notice has to be given to the Public 
"Prosecutor by the Cour t on the application of bail of the accused. The presence of the 
informant or any other person authorised by him shall be obligatory at the time of hearing 

34 
 
of the application for bail to the person under sub -section (3) of section 376 or Section 
376A or Section 376DA or Section 376DB of the Indian Penal Code. 
Further, amendments to the criminal justice system are an ongoing and continuous process. 
Further Ministry of Law & Justice have given assistance to States / UTs to set up fast Track 
Special Courts including exclusive POCSO (e -POCSO) Courts for quick disposal of cases of rape 
under POCSO Act. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee observes that the thrust of the recommendation was on developing 
some mechanism towards taking action in a coordinated manner to bring integrated changes 
with the associated law enforcement agencies so as to provide timely justice, which has not 
been addressed adequately. The Committee reiterates that the concerned Ministry may set 
up a joint mechanism so that the requisit e integrated changes that are required to be 
initiated can be formulated. 
ROLE OF EDUCATION IN SOCIETAL TRANSFORMATION 
Recommendation 
2. The Committee has noticed that the kind of attention that needs to be given to the victim of 
gender based violence is generally lacking at the medical centres in most cases. The Centres in 
rural and remote areas are not equipped to handle such cases. Further, due to lacunae in the 
medico-legal report the accused tend to escape from the clutches of law. The Committee notic es 
that crucial evidence is lost due to delay in the conduct of medico-legal examination of the victims. 
The Committee in this respect recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should 
give due attention to strengthening of medical centres e specially in rural and remote areas of the 
country. Further, the doctors and Para-medical staff need to be updated on the legal requirements 
to ensure that loopholes in the medico/legal report cannot be exploited. 
[Para-73 IV (vi)] 
3. Committee is aware that Doctors & paramedical staff are under tremendous work 
pressure, however it is required that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should sensitize 

35 
 
them about the psychological condition of the victims of gender based violence an d the need to 
handle them with empathy and due sensitivity. 
[Para-73 IV (vii)] 
Action Taken 
MoWCD vide their O.M. dated 29 th July, 2021 has submitted that the recommendations at 
this para concern Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. However, the Ministry of Women & Child 
Development fully appreciate the concerns of the Committee for sensitisation programme for the 
doctors and paramedical staff about the psychological condition of the victims of gender based 
violence. Ministry has taken up the matter with t he Ministry of Health & Family Welfare for 
implementation of the recommendations of the Committee and furnishing the ATRs directly to 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat under intimation to the MWCD vide DO letter dated 16.07.2021. 
MoWCD vide its O.M. dated 25 th October, 2021 has conveyed that t he MoH&FW has 
submitted the following response: 
 National Health Policy (2017) - Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has identified 
Gender Based Violence (GBV) as one of the priority focus areas. Nirbhaya Nari articulates 
to institutionalize inter-sectoral coordination at National and Sub -national levels and aims 
to promote coordinated action against gender violence for improving the environment for 
health.  
 Service delivery- Separate budget head in the Programme Implementation P lan (PIP) have 
been prepared for demands from states for free treatment of victims/survivors of violence.  
 Guideline & protocol on Medico Legal Care (MLC) of victims/survivors of sexual 
violence has been developed.  
 Handbook for community level workers (AS HA) _ "Mobilizing for Action on Violence 
Against Women" has been developed for community outreach services.  
 Guideline on "Public Health Response to Violence against Women and Children" has been 
developed.  
 Webinar organized in collaboration with Tata Inst itute of Social Sciences for capacity 
building of State Programme Officers on Adolescent Health including Gender based 
violence.  
 a series of webinars are organized in collaboration with the National Institute of Mental 
Health and Neuro_Science (NIMHANS) f or capacity building of State Child and 
Adolescent Health program officers, Adolescent Health Counsellors on providing psycho -
social support including Gender based violence.  
 Capacity building of various categories of Health workers for managing Gender Bas ed 
Violence in the States/Uts - Building capacities of staff from One Stop Centres on 

36 
 
responding to survivors of violence. Family Counselling Centres and Special Cells for  
women, from five states (Bihar,  Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and Rajasthan) is 
being undertaken. Thirteen sessions on themes around mental health, critical laws related 
to women and girls and linkages with health have been orgainzed thus far. Each session 
was attended by an average of 4735 participants.  
 Adolescent Health. 
 Counselling - Approx.1700 counsellors placed in Adolescent Friendly Health 
Clinics are providing counselling to adolescent girls on sexual and reproductive 
health.  
 Peer Educators - under RKSK programme, Gender Based Violence has been 
included specifically in peer e ducators training to ensure awareness and 
sensitization of adolescents.  
 Training curriculum on School Health under Ayushman Bharat, under which 
trained teachers called Health & Wellness Ambasadors, will hold interactive 
activities with school children on various themes including Gender & Equality and 
Prevention of Injuries. The aim is : 
 To encourage school children to develop knowledge and skills to 
counter gender based stereotypes, discrimination and violence, 
practice positive gender roles, and promote gender equity and 
rights in all situations.  
 To develop greater understanding of diff erent forms of abuse, 
violence, and risky behaviour, demonstrate responsible behaviours, 
promote collective response to violence and abuse, and advocate 
for safe environment, encouraging dignified a nd respectful 
treatment of all. 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee while appreciating the various steps taken, reiterates its 
recommendation that due attention should be paid towards strengthening of medical centers 
especially in rural and remote areas of the country.  
EFFECTIVE UTILISATION OF NIRBHAYA FUND 
Recommendation 
4. The Committee took note of the fact that the total apportioned amount under the Nirbhaya 
Fund currently stood at ₹7436.66 cr ores for 32 different projects/ schemes across the country. 
However, an amount of only ₹ 2647.89 crore had been disbursed by the concerned Ministries/ 
Departments for the various projects/ schemes under the Nirbhaya Fund, which is on extremely 

37 
 
low side. The Committee recommends that the Ministries/ Departments should be more proactive 
in the matter and ensure that these projects are implemented on a time bound basis so that the 
funds are utilized promptly as these projects are crucial for enhancing the safety of women. 
[Para-73 V (ii)] 
Action Taken 
 Mo WCD vide their O.M. dated 20 th August, 2021 has informed that E mpowered 
Committee reviews the progress/status of the implementation of the appraised projects/schemes on 
regular basis in conjunction with the concerned Ministries/ Departments and issues directions 
for expediting implementation of the projects/schemes in a time-bound manner.  
 Mo WCD vide their O.M. dated 16 th February, 2021 replied that the total appraised 
amount under Nirbhaya Fund currently stands at ₹9288.45 Crore for 35 different projects/ schemes 
across the country. So f ar, an amount of ₹3544.06 Crore has been disbursed/ released by 
concerned Ministries/ Departments including  MWCD for the various projects/ schemes under 
Nirbhaya Fund.  Besides review by EC on the progress/status of the implementation of the 
appraised pr ojects/schemes, the Ministry submitted that the concerned Ministries/ Departments/ 
Implementing Agencies also review the status of implementation on regular basis. Further, the 
Ministry mentioned that on an average 6-7 meetings of EC are held every year.   
 Following an interaction with t he Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child 
Development and Officials of other concerned Ministries on the issue of underutiliza tion of 
Nirbhaya Fund, Projects/Schemes under it and functioning of the Empowered Committee , the M/o 
WCD has made available a Ministry -wise list of the Projects  being monitored by each Ministry 
under Nirbhaya Fund along with the details of the date of its appraisal by the Empowered 
Committee, funds approved, released and utilized  towards each Scheme / Project. The same is at 
Annexure II.  
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee notes that underutilization of Nirbhaya  
Fund has remained a pressing issue of concern for long. At present out of the allocated funds 
of Rs. 9549 crores and funds released as Rs. 4241 crores, the funds utilized so far stand at 
around Rs. 2989 crores only.  The Committee recommends that the factors which are leading 

38 
 
to such underutilization of the Fund need to be identified. Also State Governments need to be 
brought onboard in e nsuring that the Projects/ Schemes, in which they are stakeholders, get 
implemented effectively and any issues raised by the State Governments should be addressed 
expeditiously. The Committee also recommends that the concerned Ministries must develop 
a robust mechanism for constant monitoring of Projects/ Schemes being handled by them. 
Also, guidelines may be prepared to ensure that this fund is not utilized for creating routine 
infrastructure, which even otherwise the relevant Departments have to undertake . The 
Committee also stresses that wherever there is provision under the guidelines for financial 
assistance/ compensation to the victims, it should be ensured that the same is made available 
without any procedural impediments and undue delays. 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
IS STILL AWAITED 
-Nil- 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

40 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE (CHAPTER-III) 
The Committee observes that the thrust of the recommendation was on developing 
some mechanism towards taking action in a coordinated manner to bring integrated changes 
with the associated law enforcement agencies so as to provide timely justice, which has not 
been addressed adequately. The Committee reiterates that the concerned Ministry may set 
up a joint mechanism so that the requisite integrated changes that are required to be 
initiated can be formulated.                  (Para 1) 
The Committee while appreciating the various steps taken, reiterates its 
recommendation that due attention should be paid towards strengthening of medical centers 
especially in rural and remote areas of the country.      (Para 2 and 3) 
The Committee notes that underutilization of Nirbhaya  
Fund has remained a pressing issue of concern for long. At present out of the allocated funds 
of Rs. 9549 crores and funds released as Rs. 4241 crores, the funds utilized so far stand at 
around Rs. 2989 crores only.  The Committee recommends that the factors which are leading 
to such underutilization of the Fund need to be identified. Also State Governments need to be 
brought onboard in ensuring that the Projects/ Schemes, in which they are stakeholders, ge t 
implemented effectively and any issues raised by the State Governments should be addressed 
expeditiously. The Committee also recommends that the concerned Ministries must develop 
a robust mechanism for constant monitoring of Projects/ Schemes being handl ed by them. 
Also, guidelines may be prepared to ensure that this fund is not utilized for creating routine 
infrastructure, which even otherwise the relevant Departments have to undertake. The 
Committee also stresses that wherever there is provision under t he guidelines for financial 
assistance/ compensation to the victims, it should be ensured that the same is made available 
without any procedural impediments and undue delays. 
           (Para 4) 
*** 

41 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, 
WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 3:00 P.M. on 
Tuesday, the 1st February, 2022 in Committee Room- ‘A’, Parliament House Annexe, Ground 
Floor, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman 
2.  Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
3. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
4. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
6. Shri Dhal Singh Bisen 
7.  Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
8. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
9. Shri Balak Nath 
10. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
11. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
12. Shri Dharambir Singh 
13. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
14. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S.D. Nautiyal, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3.  Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
6. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
7. Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
  
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee 
and informed that the agenda for the meeting is the consideration of the draft Action Taken 
Report (ATR) on the 316th Report of the Committee on "Issues related to Safety of Women" 
which the Committee had presented to the Houses of Parliament on 20th March, 2020. He 
apprised the members that the Action Taken Notes were received from the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development vide their communications dated the 20th August, 2020, 16th 
February, 28th June and 29th July, 2021.  

42 
 
 
2  The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Report and after deliberating on 
the observations/recommendations contained therein adopted the same with minor 
modifications. 
3. The Committee also decided to present/lay the Report to both the Houses of Parliament 
on 4th Fenrauary, 2022 during the first part of the ongoing Budget Session of the Parliament. 
The Committee, accordingly, authorized Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe, M.P. and in his 
absence, Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh, M.P. to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha. Dr. 
Dhal Singh Bisen, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu, M.P. were 
authorized to lay the above mentioned Report on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
4.   The meeting adjourned at 3:21 P.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                       A.K. Mallick  
1st February, 2022                                                                                           Director 

43 
 
Annexure-I 
Press Release and other Social Media Activity done by PIB on issues related to the Safety of 
Women. 
1. NCW signs MoU with BPR&D for Nation-Wide Gender Sensitization training Programme for 
Police Personnel, Posted On: 16 JUL. 2021 by PIB Delhi 
https://pib.gov.in/Press Release Prage.aspx?PRID=1736188 
2. Smt SmritiZubinIrani exhorts Protection Officers to make it possible for the Victims to access 
all the Legal Rights available to them, NCW in collaboration with LBSNAA Launches training 
Programme of Protection Officers in addressing Domestic Violence, Posted On: 28 JUN 2021 
By PIB Delhi. 
https://pib.gov.in/Press Release Prage.aspx?PRID=1730983 
3. Over 3 Lakh Women Provided Assistance Through 701 One Stop Centres in 35 States/UTs. 
Posted On: 22 MAY 2021 by PIB Delhi 
https://pib.gov.in/Press Release Prage.aspx?PRID=1720843 
4. Protection to Women against Sexual Harassment at Workplace, Posted On: 18 MAR 2021 by 
PIB Delhi. 
https://pib.gov.in/Press Release Prage.aspx?PRID=170781 
5. Initiatives by Government for reducing Gender Gap in all aspects of Social, Economic and 
Political Life, Posted On 25 MAR 2021 by PIB Delhi. 
https://pib.gov.in/Press Release Prage.aspx?PRID=1707475 
6. Hostel Facilities to working Women, Posted ON: 25 MAR 2021 BY PIB Dehi 
https://pib.gov.in/Press Release Prage.aspx?PRID=170483 
7. Women Safety Initiatives under Nirbhaya Fund, Postede on 19MAR 2021 BY PIB Delhi 
https://pib.gov.in/Press Release Prage.aspx?PRID=1705997  
8. Protection to Women against Sexual Harassment at Workplace Posted ON: 18 MAR 2021 by 
PIB Delhi. 
https://pib.gov.in/Press Release Prage.aspx?PRID=1705781 
9. One Stop Centres, Posted On: MAR 2021 by PIB Delhi. 

44 
 
https://pib.gov.in/Press Release Prage.aspx?PRID=1706000 
The information related to Women Safety was further disseminated through Tweets by 
@PIBWCD and PIB India and Regional and Branch Offices of PIB. The press releases were also 
shared with the Beat Correspondents. Regional and Branch Office of PIB also issued the press 
releases in Regional languages apart from English and Hindi for wider dissemination. 
 PIB regularly disseminate all the information which is provided by the Ministry including 
important decisions on women safety and also undertakes efforts to inform the public about 
various laws in place for security and safety of women including the consequences of violating 
these laws through press and media. 
2.  The following activities are regularly undertaken by PIB in general to disseminate 
information to the masses: 
(i)  Issuing press releases on various Government initiatives for women and children 
including laws for security and safety of women, to inform the masses through media. 
(ii) Arranging press conferences/briefings for Union Ministers/ MoS /Secretary, as 
and when desired by them so as to inform public through media about various important 
decisions of Government. 
(iii) PIB also undertakes social media campaign to create awareness on various 
important issues including those of women and children safety and security through various 
social media networks such as Twitter/ Facebook/ Instagram. 
(iv) PIB also provides regional publicity in vernacular languages so as to reach the last 
mile in terms of dissemination of information in a language of choice of the masses of that 
region. 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

45 
 
Annexure II 
Details of projects/ schemes being implemented under Nirbhaya Fund 
 (Rs. in Cr.) 
Ministries/ 
Departments 
Sl. 
No. 
Project Name Date of 
appraisal by 
EC 
Fund 
appraised 
by EC 
Fund 
released 
as 
provided 
by IAs. 
Funds 
utilized as 
stated by 
IAs. 
Ministry of 
Home 
Affairs 
  
1. Emergency   Response Support system 
(ERSS) 
02.02.2014 
  (CCEA) 
321.69 358.46 358.46 
2. Creation of Central Victim Compensation 
Fund (CVCF) 
June, 2015  200.00 200.00 200.00 
3. 
Cyber Crime Prevention against Women & 
Children (CCPWC) 
06.01.2016 195.83 137.05 137.05 
Sub-project   under CCPWC 04.06.2018 28.93 
4. 
Proposal for providing facility of Social 
Workers/ Counsellors at the   District and 
Sub- Divisional Police Station Level in Delhi 
18.02.2016 5.07 5.01 5.01 
5. 
New building with women centric facilities 
for Special Unit for Women   & Children 
(SPUWAC) and Special Unit for North East 
Region (SPUNER) at   Nanakpura 
18.02.2016 23.53 16.76 16.76 
6. Various other activities under Delhi Police 
‘Safety of Women’ Scheme 
04.10.2017 10.20 9.96 9.96 
7. 
Safe   City Proposal for 8 Cities 
i.e.  Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Chennai, Delhi, 
Hyderabad,   Kolkata, Lucknow, Mumbai 
01.03.2018 2919.55 1311.69 1311.69 
8. Establishment of State of Art DNA Lab. at 
CFSL, Chandigarh 
01.03.2018 99.76 33.10 33.10 
9. 
Strengthening   DNA analysis, cyber forensic 
& related facilities in SFSLs in 24 
States/UTs   i.e. i.e. Delhi, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Mizoram, 
Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, 
Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Goa, Odisha, 
Puducherry, Jharkhand, Kerala, Karnataka, 
A&N Islands, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat 
and Nagaland 
16.11.2018, 
20.02.2019,  
29.03.2019, 
18.03.2020, 
29.09.2020, 
30.09.2021. 
206.76 162.33 162.33 
10. 
Setting   up and strengthening Anti-Human 
Trafficking   Units in all districts of   States 
& UTs. 
22.10.2019 100.00 99.86 99.86 
11. 
Setting   up/ strengthening Women Help 
Desks in Police   Stations in all States   & 
UTs    (covering 10,000 Police Stations). 
22.10.2019 100.00 107.49 107.49 
12. Proposal for procurement of Forensic Kits 
for sexual Assault cases  
16.11.2018 7.09 29.03 29.03 
13. Proposal for training of Investigation 
Officers (IOs)/ Prosecution Officers (POs) 
18.03.2020 7.50 

46 
 
through Bureau of Police Research & 
Development (BPR&D) for three years 
  Total:  4225.91 2470.74 2470.74 
Ministry of 
Railways 
14. Integrated Emergency Response 
Management System  (IERMS)  
18.11.2015 500.00 294.77 94.77 
15. Provision of Video Surveillance System at 
Konkan Railway Station 
16.11.2018 17.64 17.64 9.25 
  Total  517.64 312.41 104.02 
MeiTY/ IIT 
Delhi 16. 
Development & Field Testing of panic 
Switch based safety Device   for Cars and 
Buses for aiding Women’s Safety 
19.07.2016 3.49 3.49 3.49 
Deptt. of 
Justice 17. 
Setting up Fast Track Special Courts to 
dispose off cases pending   trial under Rape 
& POCSO Act  
16.11.2018  767.25 362.23 151.66 
(Extension of the FTSCs for two more years 
upto FY 2021-22) 
05.02.2020 1687.95 0.00 0  
M/o 
Tourism 18. Safe   Tourism Destination for women in   
MP 
19.12.2019 27.98 6.24 0.00 
Ministry of 
Road 
Transport & 
Highways 
19. 
Abhaya   Project Proposal for safety  of 
women and girl child, Govt. of 
Andhra   Pradesh  
19.07.2016 138.49 58.64 0.00 
20. Women’s safety in public transport, 
UPSRTC, Govt. of U.P. 
21.07.2017 83.50 80.92 31.10 
21. 
Bengaluru   Metropolitan Transport 
Corporation, Govt. of Karnataka on Training 
women for   heavy passengers vehicles 
04.10.2017 56.06 33.64 11.14 
22. 
Proposal   of C-DAC for customization, 
deployment and management of State-wise 
vehicle   tracking platform  
20.02.2019 465.02 177.03 0.00 
  Total  743.07 350.23 42.24 
Ministry of 
Women and 
Child 
Development 
23. One   Stop Centre  (OSC)      
April,2015 
867.74 639.63 160.00 
24. Universalisation of Women Helpline (WHL) April, 2015 155.94 69.31 49.80 
25. Mahila   Police Volunteers (MPV) 20.12.2016 27.76 16.30 3.07 
26. Chirali Proposal, Women Empowerment 
Directorate 
20.12.2016 10.20 4.71 1.09 
27. 
Smart   and safe Cities Free from Violence 
against Women and Girls' Programme, 
Govt.  of M.P. 
21.07.2017 1.74 1.04 0.36 
28. Safety and Security of Women, Govt. of 
Uttarakhand 
21.07.2017 0.72 0.32 0.31 
29. Nirbhaya   Shelter Home, Govt. of Nagaland 21.07.2017 2.84 2.55 2.55 
30. NICSI  for Developing Nirbhaya Dashboard March,2017 0.24 0.24 0.24 
31. 
Proposal of Department of Information, 
MSME & Export Promotion, Govt. of UP: 
Mission Shakti for awareness and capacity 
building program for safety and 
empowerment of women and girls in 
industrial sectors 
26.03.2021 8.25 2.47 0  
32. Scheme for critical care and support for 28.04.2021 74.1 0.00 0  

47 
 
accessing justice to rape / gang-rape 
survivors and minor girls who get pregnant 
  Total  1149.53 736.57 217.42 
D/o School 
Education 
and Literacy 
33. 
Proposal of Department of School Education, 
Govt. of Bihar: Improving self-defence 
quality in women and girls’ for funding 
under Nirbhaya Fund 
26.03.2021 231.4 0.00 0  
M/o 
Housing 
& Urban 
Affairs 
34. 
Proposal of Department of Local 
Government, Punjab: Punjab Urban Local 
Bodies Surveillance Grid for Women Safety 
(PUNGRID-WS) proposed to be 
implemented in 167 Urban Local Bodies 
(ULBs) across Punjab 
26.03.2021 154.03 0.00 0  
M/o 
External 
Affairs 
35. 
Proposal for opening One Stop Centres 
(OSCs) in 10 Indian Missions abroad 
28.04.2021 40.79 0 0 
   Grand   Total   9549.04 4241.91 2989.57 
 
***** 
 