 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CH
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March
THREE HUNDRED AND SE
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three
And Sixty Sixth Report on
Ministry o
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2026 /Phalguna, 1947 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred
Report on Demands for Grants 2025-26 of the
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th March, 2026) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th March, 2026) 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ORTS 
REPORT NO. 
374 
REPORT 
Hundred 
of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in 
 
 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN,
THEE HUNDRED AND SEV
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Three Hundred and Sixty Sixth Report on Demands for Grants 2025
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS
 
 
THEE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY FOURTHS REPORT 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained
Sixty Sixth Report on Demands for Grants 2025
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th March, 2026) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th March, 2026) 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2026 / Phalguna, 1947 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
SPORTS 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained 
Sixty Sixth Report on Demands for Grants 2025-26 of the 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
 
   PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION (ii)  
3. ACRONYMS (iii) - (vi) 
   4. REPORT 01-33 
  5. OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE 
 
34-35 
6. MINUTES * 
 
*TO BE APPENDED 
 
 
 
 

i 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th   September, 2025) 
 
1.  Shri Digvijaya Singh    Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
3.  Dr. Sikander Kumar 
4.  Shri C. Sadanandan Master 
5.  #   
6.  Shrimati Sunetra Ajit Pawar 
7.  Smt. Rekha Sharma 
8.  Dr.Bhim Singh 
9.  Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
10.   Ms. Swati Maliwal * 
LOK SABHA 
11.  Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
12 Dr.Angomcha Bimol Akoijam 
13. Shrimati Rachna Banerjee 
14. Shrimati Shobhanaben Mahendrasinh Baraiya 
15. Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary 
16. Shri Jitendra Kumar Dohare 
17. Prof.Varsha Eknath Gaikwad 
18. Shri Abhijit Gangopadhyay 
19. Dr.Hemang Joshi 
20. Shri Amar Sharadrao Kale 
21. Shri Kalipada Saren Kherwal 
22. Adv Dean Kuriakose 
23. Dr.Sambit Patra 
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
25. Dr. D. Purandeswari 
26. Shri Rajeev Rai 
27. Shri Zia Ur Rehman 
28. Shri Karan Bhushan Singh 
29. Ms.Bansuri Swaraj 
30. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
31. Dr. T Sumathy alias Thamizhachi Thangapandian  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shri J. K. Mallick, Director  
Shri Devashish Sen, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Sanjeev Gupta, Assistant Committee Officer  
_______________________________ 
* w.e.f. 16 October, 2025 
# vacant from 5th January, 2026 
  

 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Seventy Fourth 
Report of the Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Three Hundred and Sixty Sixth Report of the Committee on "Demands for 
Grants 2025-26 of the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports", which was presented to the Rajya 
Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd April, 2025.  
2.  The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations contained in above mentioned 
Report were received from the Department of Youth Affairs vide their communication dated 15th 
December, 2025 and Department of Sports vide their communication dated 22nd October, 2025.  
3.  The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 
16th March, 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
16th March, 2026 
Phalguna 25, 1947(Saka) 
                            Shri Digvijaya Singh 
          Chairman, Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Education, Women, Children, 
Youth Affairs and Sports 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 
ACRONYMS 
BE Budget Estimates 
BRICS Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
DC District Collector 
DFG Demands for Grants 
DoNER Development of North Eastern Region 
DoS Department of Sports 
DoYA Department of Youth Affairs 
DPRs Detailed Project Reports 
DYO District Youth Officer 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
FY Financial Year 
HEIs Higher Education Institution 
HMC Hostel Management Committee 
HPC Holistic Progress Card 
IBPS Institute of Banking Personnel Selection 
IC International Cooperation 
IOA Indian Olympic Association 
KIC Khelo India Centre 
KIAs Khelo India Athletes 
KIS Khelo India Scheme 
LNIPE Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education 
MoF Ministry of Finance 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MoYAS Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
MY Bharat Mera Yuva Bharat 
                                          
 
 
(iii) 
 
 

 
 
NADA National Anti-Doping Agency 
NCOE National Centre of Excellence 
NPDS National Programme for Development of Sports 
NPYAD National Programme for Youth and Adolescent Development 
NSDF National Sports Development Fund 
NSA National Sports Awards 
NSF National Sports Federation 
NSNIS Netaji Subhash National Institute for Sports 
NSP National Sports Policy 
NSS National Service Scheme 
NSTC National Sports Talent Contest 
NSU National Sports University 
NYA National Youth Award 
NYP National Youth Policy 
NYKS Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan 
NYLP National Young Leadership Programme 
NYV National Youth Volunteers 
PCA Past Champion Athlete 
RCs Regional Centres 
RE Revised Estimates 
SAI Sports Authority of India 
STC SAI Training Centre/  Sports Training Centers 
TOPS Target Olympic Podium Scheme 
UC Utilization Certificate 
UT Union Territory  
VBYLD Viksit Bharat Young Leaders Dialogue  
YH Youth Hostels  
(iv) 
 

1 
 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in its 366th Report on “Demand For Grants – 2025-
26”, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd April, 
2025. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
above mentioned Report were received from the Department of Sports, Ministry of Youth 
Affairs and Sports vide their communication dated 6th June, 2025. These have been categorized 
as follows:  
 
Chapter I: Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:  
Paras - 2.1.17, 2.2.9, 2.2.10, 2.2.11, 2.2.12, 2.2.13, 2.2.14, 2.3.4, 2.3.5, 2.3.6, 
2.4.5, 2.4.6, 2.6.3a, 2.6.4, 2.6.6, 2.7.3, 2.7.5, 2.7.6, 2.8.9, 2.9.8, 2.9.9, 
2.9.10, 2.9.11, 2.10.15, 5.3.10, 5.3.11, 5.3.12, 5.3.13, 5.4.9, 5.4.10, 5.4.11, 
5.4.12, 5.4.13, 5.5.2, 5.6.17, 5.6.22, 5.7.8, 5.8.2, 5.8.3, 5.10.18, 5.10.19, 
5.11.13, 5.11.14, 5.15.1, 5.16.1 
Total - 45 
 
Chapter II: Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
Government's replies: 
 
Paras - 2.5.4, 2.6.7, 2.8.10, 5.1.5, 5.6.19, 5.6.20,  
Total - 06 
 
Chapter III: Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Paras - 2.2.6, 2.2.7, 2.2.8, 2.6.5, 2.10.14, 5.3.14, 5.6.18, 5.6.21, 5.12.1 
Total - 09 
 
Chapter-IV:  Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government are still 
awaited: 
Paras - Nil 
Total - Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
2 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee was informed that the Department secures 0.02% of the Union 
Government’s budget. The Committee noted that this was lower than expected given that the 
country has a large youth population. Further, a large part of the increase in expenditure for the 
Department is due to one-time expenses, such as the Rs 64.26 crore incurred for the up 
gradation of the MY Bharat Portal. The Committee noted that the underutilization of funds in 
previous years weakens the Department’s case for a higher budget and recommends that the 
Department ensure full utilization of funds in the future.  
(Para 2.1.17 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted.  
Due to roll out/implementation of TSA, release of NSS Grants to State NSS functionaries 
was delayed during FY 2024-25. However, in the current financial year (FY 2025-26), 
exemption to implement TSA has been accorded till 30 September 2025. As a result, 1st 
instalment of the NSS grant (25%) has already been released to most of the states and demand 
for 2nd instalment along with the UCs has been sought from the States by the Ministry so as to 
release further instalments of the Grant to the states.  The department aims to fully utilise the 
allotted fund this year. 
 Further, concerned Autonomous Bodies (ABS), attached offices & Program Divisions 
have been advised to ensure full timely utilization of funds in the future. 
NON-UTILIZATION OF BUDGET  
Recommendation 
2. The Committee queried as to why the RE for the FY 2024-25 was not utilized and as to 
why the BE for the FY 2025-26 was reduced when the resources were direly needed. The 
Committee notes that there is an increase in the budget outlay for the current financial year and 
recommends that the Department take all steps to ensure that the same is not repeated. 
 (Para 2.2.9 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Further, concerned Autonomous Bodies 
(ABS), attached offices & Program Divisions have been advised to ensure full utilization of 
funds in the future. 
STREAMLINING OF NYKS PROGRAMMES THROUGH FLAGSHIP FOCUS AREAS 
Recommendation 
3. The Committee was informed that the Nehru Yuva Kendras ran at least 42 core 
programmes and 11 special programmes in the last few years. The Committee is concerned that 

 
3 
 
the proliferation of programmes and activities dilutes the brand of the NYKS. The Committee 
was informed that each year, the NYKS core programmes are set by the Annual Action Plan 
approved by the Board of Governors. The Committee recommends that the NYKS adopt a few 
flagship programs that are conducted every year without fail, so as to provide a focus to the 
organization and build its brand positioning among youth. Additional special programmes may 
be instituted as per the decision of the Board of Governors. 
(Para 2.2.10 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. 
Annual Action Plan of MY Bharat, which is an umbrella autonomous body, has been 
divided in five flagship focus areas and all programmes are designed around these focus areas – 
These focus areas are –  
 One Nation One Youth for Viksit Bharat 
 Youth Leadership for Viksit Bharat 
 Making India a sporting and Fit Nation for Viksit Bharat 
 Building Communities for Viksit Bharat 
 Vision of Viksit Bharat @2047 
TRACKING OF ALUMNI OF NYKS, NSS AND NYVS 
Recommendation 
4. The Committee was informed that the NYKS programs are designed to instill a sense of 
civic responsibility and build personality traits that help participants in their academic and 
professional journeys. However, the Committee was informed that there is currently no 
mechanism to track the professional trajectories of NYKS participants beyond their association 
with the NYKS. The Committee believes that tracking the alumni of the programs can help inform 
the Department about the long-term utility of the program, as well as create an alumni network 
that can benefit the existing volunteers. The same provision can be extended to NSS volunteers 
and NYVs as well. The Committee notes that the MY Bharat Platform has provided a dedicated 
profile page for each youth to describe their professional interest. For Experiential Learning 
Program conducted on the portal, a certificate of participation is also reflected on the youth 
profile page as an incentive to youth to update their profiles from time to time. This facility can 
be used to track the NYK volunteers, NSS volunteers, and NYVs after their association with the 
Department and its activities ends. 
(Para 2.2.11 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted.  
All NSS Volunteers across the country shall be registered on MY Bharat Portal and their 
profile may also be created to get the benefits of Experiential Learning Programme (ELPs) by 
the various Govt. Departments and agencies from time to time. On boarding of educational 
institutions on My Bharat is also being undertaken across the country as knowledge institutions 
(KIs). For tracking the alumni of NSS a study is being currently undertaken on similar lines as 
the NCC Alumni Association. NSS Alumni Association shall also be registered under the 
Society Regulations Act 1860. The future NSS Alumni Association would serve as a centralized, 

 
4 
 
national-level digital platform for alumni across India to register, network, engage and contribute 
to the NSS community. 
It is further proposed to create a special category on MY Bharat portal for registration of 
NSS, NYV and MY Bharat alumni. This shall enable tracking of the activities performed and 
possibilities for these alumni to act as future mentor. 
 
PROMOTION OF CONSTITUTIONAL VALUES IN YOUTH PROGRAMMES 
Recommendation 
5. The Committee noted with satisfaction that more than 2,000 Padyatras were organised 
across the country to commemorate the Constitution Day 2024 celebrating 75 years of Indian 
constitution, in which more than 1.5 lakh youth and others participated where oath of the 
Preamble to the Constitution was integral part of the Padyatra. The theme of these padyatras 
was Humaara Samvidhaan, Humaara Swabhimaan. On the same lines, the Committee 
recommends that all youth programs must begin with oath taking of the Preamble to the 
Constitution, and the recitation of the National Pledge. Similarly, all NYKS building and other 
structures operated by the Department must feature a copy of the Preamble to the Indian 
Constitution to build a culture of Constitutional morality among our youth. 
(Para 2.2.12 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Suggestion has been noted. Further in so far as NSS is concerned, it is informed that as 
per the commemoration of the Constitution Day on 26th November has been observed in all NSS 
Institutions in a grand manner by adopting the pledge taking and reading of the preamble of the 
Indian Constitution. Further, the communication has already been sent to all NSS Regional 
Directorates, State NSS Officers and the education institutes to follow the program with reading 
of the preamble of the constitution. The display of the Preamble of the Constitution has been 
installed at all NSS Offices. 
Communication sent to all MY Bharat Kendras, to begin such program with reading of the 
Preamble of the Constitution. The display of the Preamble of the Constitution shall also be done 
in all MY Bharat Kendras. 
ENHANCED ENGAGEMENT WITH DISTRICT COLLECTORS, STATE 
ADMINISTRATION AND ELECTED REPRESENTATIVES 
Recommendation 
6. The Committee recommends that the Department should work more closely with the 
District Collectors, the State administration, and elected representatives to involve them in 
programmes being conducted at the district level so that they can leverage their own networks to 
enhance youth participation in the schemes. 
(Para 2.2.13 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. As far as MY Bharat is concerned, it is 
informed that the district MY Bharat coordinates with district collectors, State Govt. departments 
on regular basis. District MY Bharat extends invitation to elected representatives in its 
programmes.  

 
5 
 
Further, NSS is a flagship programme under Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports which 
is being implemented in all the States through 15 Regional Directorates of NSS and State NSS 
Officers as field offices to implement the scheme in coordination with State Governments 
departments. The NSS Functionaries at Institution and State level are always coordinating with 
the district administration and urban local bodies for all kinds of community welfare and 
awareness programmes in the campus and community., e.g,: tree plantation drives, Shramdaan, 
Swachhata Hi Seva, Ek Ped Maa ke Naam campaign, Maati ko Naman Veero ka Vandan 
campaign, Health and Hygiene camps, women and child empowerment campaigns, environment 
awareness campaigns etc., are inaugurated by the elected public representatives (MPs, MLAs 
and Councillors of local bodies). 
CAPACITY BUILDING SUPPORT TO NYKS, NSS AND YOUTH CLUBS IN MANIPUR 
Recommendation 
7. The Committee notes the work done by NYKS, NSS, and local Youth Clubs in promoting 
peace and social harmony in Manipur, and in bringing Internally Displaced Persons into 62 
relief camps. The Committee encourages the Department to continue supporting these groups in 
these endeavours and to provide them with capacity building support to promote social harmony 
at the grassroots level. 
(Para 2.2.14 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted.  
Further, despite social unrest and prevailing situation in Manipur, the NSS Units have 
been actively carrying out activities with primary focus on community services. The committee 
suggestions will be complied with and NSS volunteers and functionaries shall be encouraged to 
be involved in capacity building support to promote social harmony and national integration at 
grassroots level. 
From Manipur, 18,706 youth volunteers and 45 youth clubs have registered on the MY 
Bharat portal. MY Bharat is providing a wide range of volunteering and experiential learning 
opportunities for young people. Some of the notable programs include celebrating important 
national days and weeks, the International Day of Yoga, Swachhta (cleanliness) programs, 
promoting sports through district and block-level sports programs, and experiential learning 
programs in collaboration with the Department of Post and All India Radio. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF NYV SCHEME AND COVERAGE ACROSS STATES/UTS 
Recommendation 
8. The Committee notes with concern that there is a steady decrease in the RE of the 
National Service Scheme as compared to its BE for the last four financial years – the RE in 
2021-22 was 89.48% of the BE; in 2022-23 it was 87.91%, in 2023-24 it was 72.07% and in 
2024-25 it was 72.05%. The Committee recommends that the Department look into the reasons 
for the same and ensure that the enhanced budget for FY25-26 is utilized fully. 
(Para 2.3.4 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. 

 
6 
 
It is submitted that due to roll out/implementation of TSA system, release of NSS Grants 
to State NSS functionaries was delayed during FY 2024-25. However, in the current financial 
year (FY 2025-26), exemption for CNA has been accorded till 30th September 2025. As a result, 
1st instalment of the NSS grant (25%) has already been released to most of the states and demand 
for 2nd instalment along with the UCs has been sought from the States by the Ministry so as to 
release the further instalments of the Grant to the states.  The department aims to fully utilise the 
allotted funds this year i.e., 2025-26. 
DEPLOYMENT OF NATIONAL YOUTH VOLUNTEERS UNDER MY BHARAT 
Recommendation 
9. The Committee notes that the National Youth Volunteers (NYVs) are the key 
implementers of this scheme since they work as a bridge between the youth and the field officers 
of the NYKS and MY Bharat. However, in the FY 2024-25, the Department was not able to reach 
the target number of NYVs and the scheme was implemented only in eight States and UTs. This 
must be avoided in the future. 
(Para 2.3.5 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Efforts are being made to deploy the MY 
Bharat Youth Volunteers at all block levels.  
Recommendation of the Committee is kindly noted.  
REVISION OF HONORARIUM OF NATIONAL YOUTH VOLUNTEERS UNDER 
RYSK SCHEME 
Recommendation 
10. The Committee notes that during the EFC meeting for the continuation of RYSK scheme 
for the period from 2021-22 to 2025-26, all the seven schemes of RYSK including NYC were 
deliberated upon. The proposal of the Ministry for enhancing the honorarium of NYVs from Rs. 
5000/- to Rs. 15000/- was also discussed but not agreed to by the EFC. 
However, the Committee recommends that the Department continue to advocate for an 
increased honorarium of Rs. 15,000 per month for NYVs. 
(Para 2.3.6 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
The 3rd party assessment study has been initiated by the Department of Youth Affairs to 
review the RYSK Scheme and on the basis of the report that is to be received by the agency; the 
matter will be taken up in the next EFC with Ministry of Finance to enhance the honorarium. 
Department will also indicate the view of Committee in their EFC meetings.  
ADOLESCENT DEVELOPMENT AND WOMEN YOUTH LEADERSHIP UNDER 
NPYAD 
Recommendation 
11. The Committee recommends that the Department consider adolescents as a distinct sub-
group among the youth and address their distinct needs through this scheme. The Department 

 
7 
 
must also focus on developing leadership skills among women youth to challenge the 
misconception that the youth refers only to men. 
(Para 2.4.5 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Further, as per the National Programme for 
Youth and Adolescent Development (NPYAD) Scheme Guidelines, ‘youth’ would cover persons 
belonging to the age group of 15-29 years and ‘adolescent’ would cover persons in the age group 
of 10-19 years.  Some of the activities for which grants-in-aid may be made under NPYAD 
Scheme towards development and empowerment of adolescents are Life Skills Education, 
Counselling, Career Guidance and Residential Camps.  
As regards development of leadership skills among women youth, women participants 
are given equal preference in all youth leadership programmes under MY Bharat and NSS. 
PROVISION OF E-LIBRARY FOR YOUTH IN NATIONAL YOUTH POLICY 
Recommendation 
12. The Committee recommends that the National Youth Policy must reflect the need for an 
e-library for youth, which brings together all digital resources, including key texts written by our 
freedom fighters and other national icons, for India’s youth. 
(Para 2.4.6 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
The recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee has been noted and shall 
be kept in view at the time of formulating revised ‘National Youth Policy’. 
 
IMPROVING UTILISATION OF YOUTH HOSTELS BY STATES/UTS 
Recommendation 
13. The Department may make endeavour to impress upon the State/UT Govt. to formulate a 
plan for better utilization of these youth hostels. 
(Para 2.6.3a of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. 
RENOVATION AND MAINTENANCE OF YOUTH HOSTELS 
Recommendation 
14. The Committee notes that the physical maintenance of 84 Youth Hostels will not cost 
much, thus, both the Central and State Government, should make allocations for their annual 
maintenance. The revenue expenditure under the Youth Hostel sub-scheme have two components 
i.e. ‘Honorarium to Managers & Wardens’ and ‘Repair/ Renovation of Youth Hostels’. As per 
the Youth Hostel Manual, the responsibility of the repair, maintenance, and improvement in the 
building of the Youth Hostels is with the State/UT Governments. For alternations or major 
repairs to the building, if the State Government is unable to make available necessary funds, the 
Directorate of Youth Services & Sports of the State may refer it to Central Department for a 
grant. The Committee notes that the Department informed the Committee that “some of the youth 

 
8 
 
hostels are not in habitable conditions,” an observation which was corroborated by MPs. 
Accordingly, the Committee strongly recommends that funds should be provided by the 
Department for the renovation of youth hostels. 
(Para 2.6.4 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Further, the Youth Hostel Scheme contains 
a provision to extend a need-based, one-time grant / financial assistance up to ₹20 lakh for 
renovation and upgradation of Youth Hostels, subject to receipt of viable proposals. For 
provision of grant additional to this Department of Youth Affairs will send a case DoE, Ministry 
of Finance indicating the recommendation of Hon’ble Committee.  
The Department is exploring options to manage Youth Hostels on a PPP mode, in order 
to expand coverage and provide affordable hostels to larger number of youth.  
EXPANSION OF YOUTH HOSTELS IN METROPOLITAN CITIES, STATE 
CAPITALS AND EDUCATIONAL CENTRES 
Recommendation 
15. The Committee notes that there are no youth hostels in NCT Delhi– although the 
Committee had specifically recommended it in all capitals. Similarly, the Committee notes that 
previous recommendations made by the Committee for hostels specifically for girl youth have not 
been accepted by the Department. It re-emphasizes the need for the same given the cultural 
sensitivities involved and the concerns around safety of female youth in these hostels. The 
Committee notes that there is acute shortage of youth hostels in the country, particularly in 
educational centres, which hurts the educational prospects of youth from low-income groups, 
girls, SCs, STs, OBCs, and EWS. The Committee, therefore, recommends that additional budget 
be made available for the construction of youth hotels in the four metropolitan cities, capital 
cities of each State, and centres of education for boys and girls separately to ensure the cheapest 
boarding facilities for the youth of the country. The Committee recommends that the Department 
seek additional funds from the Ministry of Finance for the same at RE 2025-26 stage. 
(Para 2.6.6 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Youth Hostel as per the manual is available for all youth, however suggestion of the Committee 
has been noted and shall be kept in view while taking a decision for construction of new Youth 
Hostels. While projecting for more funds to Ministry of Finance, Department will make them 
aware regarding recommendations of Hon’ble Committee.  
RE-DESIGNING YOUTH HOSTELS FOR YOUTH ENGAGEMENT AND 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
Recommendation 
16. The Committee was informed that in the recently concluded Viksit Bharat Young Leaders 
Dialogue in January, 2025, one of the key recommendations made by youth was the need to have 
more co-working spaces for young entrepreneurs in urban spaces. In order to meet the 
requirement of youth and for optimum utilization of the existing infrastructure, it may be planned 
to re-design Youth Hostels for constructive youth engagement and empowerment. 
(Para 2.7.3 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  

 
9 
 
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
ENSURING OPTIMAL FUND UTILIZATION AND RURAL COMPONENT UNDER 
NYLP 
Recommendation 
17. The Committee notes that this dynamic platform was envisaged to empower young 
Indians to contribute their ideas and perspectives towards fulfilling the vision of Viksit Bharat. 
However, the funds utilization position shows that, under the Scheme, the expenditure as on 
31/01/25 is Rs. 4.01Crores only whereas the Revised Estimates for the FY 24-25 is Rs. 
6.00Crores. With regard to NYLP, the Committee noted that the rural component of the youth 
should not be lost sight of and every effort should be made to reach out to rural youth. 
(Para 2.7.5 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
PROMOTING LEADERSHIP QUALITIES IN WOMEN YOUTH THROUGH NYLP, 
NSS AND NYKS 
Recommendation 
18. The Committee noted that there is no targeted and specific programme for inspiring 
leadership qualities in women youth. The example of women leaders of the past should be used 
to inspire the younger generations through the NYLP, as well as through the activities of the NSS 
and NYKS. 
(Para 2.7.6 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. 
Further, NSS is a flagship programme under the MOYA&S which ensures the gender 
balance in all programs, especially targeted programs for youth such as special camping 
programs, national integration programs, Adventure camp programs, National Youth Parliament 
programs, the RDCs etc., are regularly organized with specific purpose to develop stronger youth 
for nation building activities. 
STRENGTHENING YOUTH ENGAGEMENT AND AWARENESS OF GOVERNMENT 
SCHEMES VIA MY BHARAT 
Recommendation 
19. The Committee notes that the Department has been using the MY Bharat portal to create 
awareness about Government schemes and to engage youth in a dialogue on public policy. 
The Department has hosted a series of programs such as the Viksit Bharat Yuva Connect 
program, aimed at fostering youth engagement and leadership in the developmental 
transformation of India, in many educational institutions across the country since its launch in 
Pune in September 16, 2024. In the Viksit Bharat Young Leaders Dialogue final stage, over 
2,400 youth participated in an interaction with Hon'ble Prime Minister himself. The Department 
has also conducted activities like “Ek Ped Maa Ke Naam” and interactions with ministers and 

 
10 
 
eminent speakers from the field of sports and entrepreneurship. The Committee notes that the 
biggest challenge faced by the Department however is that of creating awareness of its schemes, 
including MY Bharat. 
(Para 2.8.9 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
The observations of the Committee are noted. 
 The Department is committed to further strengthening awareness and outreach efforts 
through the MY Bharat portal and other platforms as well as programs. Making the portal and 
the quiz available in vernacular languages is ensuring wider publication.  
MY Bharat has various features designed to engage young people and promote different 
initiatives. For example, quizzes are being used to get youth involved. Additionally, youth 
leaders who participated in the Viksit Bharat Young Leaders Dialogue are helping to raise 
awareness about MY Bharat and other government schemes through their peer networks and 
social media. 
Further efforts are underway to enhance visibility of schemes and initiatives, and to 
deepen youth engagement in the nation-building process. 
ADDRESSING VACANCIES AND STRENGTHENING ENROLLMENT OF NSS 
VOLUNTEERS 
Recommendation 
20. The Committee notes that the vacancies of NSS volunteers are around 50%. Hence, there 
is an urgent need to fill these vacancies especially in colleges and universities. The Department 
should develop an action plan to fill the same and share it with the Committee. 
(Para 2.9.8 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
It is submitted that approximately 50% of the bona fide NSS Volunteers graduate at the 
end of each academic session in March-April every year. Subsequently, the enrolment of new 
NSS Volunteers begins in July and is completed in August every year, followed by submission 
of detailed enrolment data to the concerned NSS Regional Directorate (s) of NSS. 
The actual strength of NSS Volunteers is consolidated by September every year, after completion 
of the enrolment process. Also, proposal for enhancement of total strength of NSS Volunteers 
from 39 Lakh to 64 Lakh is under process. 
 
DEVELOPING A COMMON FRAMEWORK AND CREDITIZATION OF NSS 
SERVICE HOURS 
Recommendation 
21. The Committee notes that various states have taken initiative to reward and recognize the 
contributions of NSS volunteers, but that there is a wide variation in the policy adopted by 
different states. The Committee recommends the Department try to bridge this gap by developing 
and radiating a common framework for the same. In particular, the Committee recommends that 
the Department of Youth Affairs work with the Department of Higher Education to ensure that 

 
11 
 
service hours undertaken by NSS volunteers are creditized in the Academic Bank of Credits 
accepted by HEIs. 
(Para 2.9.9 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
The committee’s suggestions to have a common framework for rewarding and 
recognizing the contributions of NSS Volunteers across the state are noted. Further, regarding 
the matter of credits for NSS Volunteers, the matter had been taken up with UGC and UGC vide 
its DO letter dated 13.08.2015 had requested Vice Chancellors of all Universities to implement 
NSS as credit based elective subject in Higher Education System. Also, this Ministry vide DO 
dated 28.07.2022 had requested State Govt. to provide various incentives to NSS volunteers in 
the form of weightage of NSS Certificates in the jobs, in higher education, during admissions, 
State NSS Awards etc. 
TRANSFORMATION AND ACTIVITIES OF THE NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME 
(NSS) 
Recommendation 
22. The Committee notes the proposal to transform the NSS into the National Service and 
Skill Development Scheme. It recommends that the transition should be expedited. It further 
recommends that the NSS take up communal harmony and drug abstention and de-addiction as 
major thrusts for its activities going forward. Like with the NYKS, the Committee recommends 
that all youth programs must begin with oath taking of the Preamble to the Constitution, and the 
recitation of the National Pledge. 
(Para 2.9.10 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
There is no proposal to transform the National Service Scheme(NSS). Under the banner 
of MY Bharat-National Service Scheme (NSS), the campaigns like communal harmony, drug 
abstention and de-addiction are already a part of the regular activities. The NSS units across the 
country conduct awareness drives/ campaigns by the participation of NSS Volunteers in adopted 
villages, slums to create awareness about the ill effects of drugs consumption. The rallies on 
communal harmony are also being conducted on the occasions like National Unity Day on 31st 
October every year, Republic Day (26 January) and Independence Day (15th August) etc. 
Additionally, all the National/ Regional level camps for NSS Volunteers such as National 
Integration Camps, Pre- Republic Day Parade Camps and Republic Day Parade Camp begin with 
oath taking of the Preamble to the Constitution, followed by recitation of the National Pledge. 
REGULAR IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF NSS VOLUNTEER SCHEMES 
Recommendation 
23. The Committee recommends that there should be a regular impact assessment of 
volunteer schemes to track the tangible contributions made by volunteers under this scheme and 
understand how these programs can be improved in future years.  
(Para 2.9.11 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Further there is a procedure given in the NSS 
manual 2006 that at College level, University level and State level, Advisory Committee 

 
12 
 
meetings may be conducted for the assessment of volunteer schemes to track the tangible 
contributions made by volunteers / functionaries. These meetings are held regularly in states and 
reports sent to Regional Directorate of NSS. The third party evaluation is also currently 
underway.  
FILLING PROFESSOR POSITIONS AT RGNIYD 
Recommendation 
24. The Committee was informed that all 5 positions for Professor in RGNIYD are currently 
vacant. The Committee was further informed that previous attempts to fill these positions were 
unsuccessful since no suitable applications were received. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should look into the reasons for the same and take suitable corrective action if required, 
including possibly revisiting existing compensation, and working more closely with Universities 
for a wider dissemination of job advertisements. 
(Para 2.10.15 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee is noted.  
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE AND SUPPORT TO ATHLETES AND SPORTS 
INSTITUTIONS 
Recommendation 
25. The Committee notes that the Department of Sports is making an effort to provide 
financial assistance not only at the institutional level but also at the individual level. It 
appreciated the efforts that the investments are not in all categories of events / sports for sending 
the teams abroad for training, participating in international events, conducting international 
events in India, national championship events and for procuring sports equipment. Financial 
assistance is also extended through SAI for organizing coaching camps, for preparing national 
teams and for engaging the services of foreign coaches but also to provide comprehensive 
support to athletes with disabilities, covering aspects like training, competition exposure, 
medical support, travel, and financial assistance to ensure that India’s athletes are well-
prepared for major events like the Paralympics Games, World Championships, and other 
international competitions. The Committee recommends that the Department continue its 
initiatives and provide further resources to athletes and institutions under this scheme. 
(Para 5.3.10 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The observations of the Committee have been duly noted. 
TALENT IDENTIFICATION, TRAINING, AND NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT IN 
SPORTS 
Recommendation 
26. The Committee recommends that the Department should integrate their strategy for 
talent hunt in all the games and sports with the National Sports Policy and that it should be 
synergized with the games at the school, district, state and national level. It should be continuous 
and ongoing process on yearly basis at all levels, so that sports talent is adequately identified 
and recognized. The Committee notes that it is heartening that SAI has deputed High 
Performance Analyst (HPA) Nutritionist at each NCOE to take care of the dieting and nutrition 

 
13 
 
requirement of athletes. However, it recommended that the Department give additional focus to 
the nutritional components of sports persons training in the SAI Training Centers (STCs), 
Extension Centers of STCs, and National Sports Talent Contest centers as well. The Committee 
recommended that places like Haryana, Manipur, Punjab, etc. which are famous for particular 
sports, need to be invested in to further develop the sports ecosystem in these states. 
(Para 5.3.11 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Under SAI Training Centres (STCs), the Department has a well-defined selection criteria 
for induction of athletes into the STCs. Athletes are considered for selection based on desirable 
performance in school, university, zonal, district, and national-level competitions, subject to 
being medically and physically fit and demonstrating potential through a battery of tests. This 
ensures that talent is identified at the grassroots and provided with structured training and 
support. Also, there are qualified Nutritionists at the Regional Centre level who prepare diet 
charts for athletes at STCs. The dietary requirements of athletes are regularly monitored by the 
respective Regional Centres to ensure nutritional adequacy and alignment with training loads. 
Further, the selection of athletes into NCOEs is undertaken by Talent Identification and 
Development Committees (TIDCs) specific to each sporting discipline. Athletes are selected 
through annual assessments based on their performance in national and international 
competitions. These shortlisted athletes are invited to assessment camps, where induction is 
conducted based on a comprehensive evaluation including Performance indicators, 
Anthropometric measurements, Physiological and psychological assessments. 
This robust process ensures that only athletes with the highest potential are inducted into 
the NCOEs. 
Also, the National Sports Talent Contest (NSTC) Scheme includes: 
 Medal winners at State/National level competitions are admitted, subject to medical 
fitness. 
 Medal winners at the District level or participants in State level competitions are also 
eligible, subject to being medically and physically fit and demonstrating potential through 
battery of tests. 
 
Through various components of Khelo India, talent is identified and nurtured. Khelo India 
Talent development component identifies meritorious athletes through various sets of 
competition including Khelo India Games and nurtures them. Apart from this, talent is nurtured 
at district level through over 1048 Khelo India Centres across the country. 
 
Significant steps have already been taken under Khelo India Scheme to address the 
Committee's recommendations regarding talent identification, financial assistance, and the 
development of sports ecosystems in states like Haryana, Manipur, and Punjab. A list of the 
initiatives in the above states is given below: 
 In the State of Haryana: 
 21 Khelo India Centres 
 490 Khelo India Athletes (KIAs) which is around 17% of country’s Khelo India Athletes 
 20 Khelo India Accredited Academies 

 
14 
 
 
In the State of Punjab: 
 29 Khelo India Centres 
 159 Khelo India Athletes (KIAs) 
 24 Khelo India Accredited Academies 
In the State of Manipur: 
 35 Khelo India Centres 
 109 Khelo India Athletes (KIAs) 
 10 Khelo India Accredited Academies 
INTEGRATION OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS AND PROMOTION OF SPORTS 
SCHOOLS 
Recommendation 
27. The Committee recommends that education and sports need to be synchronized. Special 
schools need to be established to promote such talents without compromising on school / college 
education. The Committee noted that successful examples of sports education in foreign 
countries should be studied for adaptation in India as well. Sport integrated learning, as 
envisioned in the NEP, should be promoted. The collaboration of SAI, private players, the 
Ministry of Education, and State Governments should be materialized through a policy and at 
the ground level a sports-school curriculum should be evolved. The National Code for Good 
Governance in Sports should be paradigm for formulating the above policy, including CSR funds 
from some international brands and curricula. This would bring about transparency and 
accountability in this field. 
(Para 5.3.12 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
 
Action Taken 
The observations of the Committee have been duly noted. 
Further the Ministry has recognized ‘School Games Federation of India’ for the 
promotion and development of ‘School Sport’ in the country. 
Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education (LNIPE), Gwalior is in process to 
implement NEP 2020 at LNIPE, Gwalior from academic session 2025-26. In relation to adapting 
Sports Education in India in line with foreign countries the institute has signed various MoU's 
with foreign universities. 
National Sports University (NSU) has also planned to set up sports schools and feeder 
schools, along with hybrid-mode courses for NCOE hostel inmates, ensuring flexibility and 
inclusivity in sports education. 
Further, the Government has been regularly interacting with the PSUs and corporates, 
regarding extending contributions to the National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) and 
becoming active partners for the promotion of sports among youth. As a result, many corporate 
organizations have come forward to join hands with NSDF by providing financial support for 
sports development in the country through CSR funding. CSR funding from international brands 
are also welcomed. 

 
15 
 
Additionally, Governance and management of the NSFs is, at present, regulated in terms of 
the Sports Code, which is an amalgamation of instructions and guidelines brought out by the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports. The Sports Code requires the NSFs to follow healthy 
management practices, accountability, transparency, impartial and transparent selection 
procedures, age and tenure restrictions of office bearers, basic universal principles of good 
governance in sports, proper accounting procedures, prevention of age fraud & sexual 
harassment of women, and holding of elections as per model election guidelines. 
AUGMENT AND OPTIMIZE FINANCIAL RESOURCES FOR SPORTS 
Recommendation 
28. The Committee noted that while the budget of Department of Sports has increased substantially in the last ten years, there is a need to further augment the financial resources for sports. The Committee recommends that the Department attempt to maximize utilization of the budget to seek greater allocations in the coming years. 
(Para 5.3.13 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The observations of the Committee have been duly noted. 
MONITORING AND UTILIZATION OF FUNDS UNDER KHELO INDIA SCHEME 
Recommendation 
29. The Committee notes that funds are allocated Scheme-wise and not State-wise in this 
Ministry. The Khelo India Scheme is a demand-driven scheme. The proposals received from the 
State/UT Governments and other eligible entities are considered for financial support, subject to 
their completeness, technical feasibility and availability of funds under the Scheme in line with 
the twin objectives of mass participation and promotion of excellence in sports to infuse sports 
culture in the country. Further the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) received from the States are 
meticulously studied and the States are guided in respect of the shortcoming. Hence, the 
Committee recommends that the Department should constantly monitor the utilization 
certificates and completion certificates. The Committee noted that so far, a total of 321 projects 
worth Rs 3080 Crores have been sanctioned under Khelo India Scheme, of which over 200 are 
complete. 
(Para 5.4.9 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The observations of the Committee have been duly noted.  
IMPROVE KHELO INDIA BUDGET UTILIZATION AND SUPPORT HOCKEY 
DEVELOPMENT 
Recommendation 
30. The Committee notes that budget utilization in Khelo India needs to be improved and that 
it was only ~60% in FY23 and 87.2% in FY24. The Committee recommends the Department 
work more closely with State Governments to achieve the same. Further, specific provisions must 
be made to support the promotion and development of Hockey. 
(Para 5.4.10 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
 

 
16 
 
Action Taken 
The observations of the Committee have been duly noted. 
Further, with regard to Hockey Discipline, wide array of support is already being provided 
through Khelo India. Detail is given below: 
 Khelo India Centres- 95 
 Khelo India State Centres of Excellence- 8 
 36 ASMITA Leagues have been conducted with 5095 athletes participating in it. The 
Asmita League has been a game-changer for the Indian women's hockey ecosystem, with 
numerous players being selected for the National Centre of Excellence (NCOE). Many of 
these talented individuals now represent the senior and junior Indian Women's Hockey 
teams, with notable examples including Ms. Sunelita Toppo and Ms. Sakshi Rana. 
 Khelo India Athletes- 190 
Khelo India Accredited Academies- 21 
PROMOTION OF SPORTS DEVELOPMENT IN THE NORTH EAST REGION 
Recommendation 
31. The Committee noted that the development of sports in the Northeast must be given 
special attention and focus. Due to the higher costs faced in this region, additional funds should 
be made available to NCOEs in this region, in collaboration with Ministry for DoNER and other 
agencies. 
(Para 5.4.11 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The observations of the Committee have been duly noted. 
Further, special measures have already been taken for promotion of sports in North East under 
Khelo India Scheme. The same are listed below: 
 2 KICs per district have been sanctioned to North East States as against the norm of one 
per district in general 
 So far, out of 17 editions of Khelo India games, 2 have been conducted in North East 
Region, thus strengthening the capability of states to conduct mega sporting events 
 ASMITA Leagues – Over 200 leagues have been conducted in Northeast region, out of 
total of 1274 leagues in the country, constituting over 16% of the leagues for women 
through Khelo India.  
Also, there’s a North East Regional Center (NERC) of Lakshmibai National lnstitute of 
Physical Education (LNIPE) at Guwahati. This was established at Sonapur, Guwahati in the year 
2010 under the Prime Minister 100 days fast track program. The main objective of this regional 
center is to provide and act as Center of Excellence in the North East Region imbibing the sports 
potentials and sports academies in more disciplines.  
At present two sports academies in collaboration with SAI have been established at Regional 
Center, NERC, Guwahati as National Centers of Excellence in Archery and Cycling which have 
a sanctioned trainee’s strength of 50 each.  

 
17 
 
Also, the National Sports University is functional in the state of Manipur at Imphal. The 
Permanent campus of University is likely to be completed in November, 2025. 
ANNUAL CONDUCT AND ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA OF KHELO INDIA GAMES 
Recommendation 
32. The Committee noted that the Khelo India Games being organized by the Department of 
Sports are enabling talented young sportspersons to get experience of international standard 
events. A total of 16 editions of these Games have been hosted so far, where more than 50,000 
athletes have participated, transforming the sports competition landscape in India. The 
Committee recommends that the Khelo India Games be held annually so as to ensure maximum 
participation of sportspersons in these games. The Committee further recommends that the name 
and eligibility of the Khelo India University games may be shifted solely to the age of the 
participant, to ensure a level playing field for all sportspersons who may not be enrolled in 
HEIs. 
(Para 5.4.12 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The observations of the Committee have been duly noted. 
PRIORITIZATION OF KHELO INDIA FUNDS TOWARDS ATHLETES, COACHING, 
AND SUPPORT INFRASTRUCTURE 
Recommendation 
33. The Committee recommends that the disbursement of funds under Khelo India be directed 
towards investment in sportspersons, coaching, nutrition and health support, and investments in 
field-of-play over large-scale infrastructure projects like stadiums. 
(Para 5.4.13 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The observations of the Committee have been duly noted. 
PROMOTION OF SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE AND EVENTS IN JAMMU & 
KASHMIR 
Recommendation 
34. The Committee understood that enhanced infrastructure for J&K is provided to create 
better prospects for sportspersons.  The Committee recommends that in J&K, the improvement of sports infrastructure and the regular happening of sports events in Jammu and Kashmir has made it an emerging hub of sports. Be it cricket, martial arts, volley ball, athletics and other sports, regular competitions are being organized in the Union Territory under the ‘Khelo India’ programme. This has encouraged many players to qualify for national and international sports events. Hence, the organization of Sports events and activities is being promoted as an economic and cultural activity also. 
(Para 5.5.2 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The observations of the Committee have been duly noted.  

 
18 
 
Further, till date, 5 editions of Khelo India Winter Games have been conducted in Jammu & 
Kashmir and Ladakh with the participation of more than 4500 athletes. 
BUDGET ALLOCATION AND EXPENDITURE JUSTIFICATION FOR SAI 
Recommendation 
35. After going through the financial data submitted by the Ministry, the Committee observed 
that under the scheme of SAI there is an increase in need for funds due to establishment 
expenditure and to balance out to the expenditure, the amount was adjusted from the internal 
revenue. It recommends that the funds allocated should be expended only within its limits. The 
Committee hopes that proper procedure followed for adjusting the amount within the allocated 
budget of the Ministry. It was surprised to learn that in spite of SAIs’ demand for rising 
expenditure, only Rs. 830.00 crores was allocated in the BE 2025-26. The Committee would like 
to direct the Department of Sports to justify its expenditure vis- à-vis BE 2025-26. 
(Para 5.6.17 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The year-wise financial requirements of organization under Department of Sports 
including SAI are carefully examined within the available resources and the budget is allocated 
accordingly. However, the observations of the Committee have been duly noted. 
EXPANSION OF TALENT SCOUTING AND DEVELOPMENT INFRASTRUCTURE IN 
SPORTS 
Recommendation 
36. The Committee notes that the current sports talent scouting infrastructure for the country 
includes the 67 STCs (SAI Training Centers), 26 STC Extension Centers, and 68 NSTC (National 
Sports Talent Contest) centers across the country. The Committee recommends that this 
infrastructure be expanded over time with the goal of at least one talent scouting center in each 
district of the country, with the goal of scouting for sports talent between the age of 8 years and 
14 years. The talent so scouted should be supported through enrolment in the NCOEs, where the 
amenities extended to them should be expanded to eventually provide sports training cum 
residential facilities cum schooling. The sportspersons at NCOEs should have the facility for 
education cum sports training, along with the best of the coaching facilities, nutrition support, 
sports medicine, and mental counseling as part of the training program. The screening should be 
dynamic, and sportspersons must be held to high standards to retain their spot in the NCOEs. 
The Committee notes that a number of excellent sports persons are left out in villages and 
other remote areas who can excel in sports because they don't have adequate resources to 
pursue their games. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of Sports and SAI to 
conduct rallies along the lines of recruitment rallies of Army to identify such sportspersons in 
their early ages and to groom them with adequate training and financial aid. This will help the 
country to excel other countries in field of sports. 
(Para 5.6.22 & 23 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
SAI has an exhaustive and robust talent identification and induction process already in 
place. The details of the same have been elaborated in the ATN of recommendation Number 34. 
However, the observations of the Committee have been duly noted.  
 

 
19 
 
STRENGTHENING MANPOWER AND ENSURING INCLUSIVE REPRESENTATION 
IN THE ORGANIZATION 
Recommendation 
37. The Committee recommends that the increase in allocation of funds should be spent on 
strengthening the organization by appointing new manpower in all the categories of posts like 
Groups A, B and C and in providing proper representation of all classes of the society. 
(Para 5.7.8 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The observations of the Committee have been duly noted. 
ENHANCE INCLUSION AND WOMEN’S PARTICIPATION UNDER KHELO INDIA 
INITIATIVES 
Recommendation 
38. The Committee notes the numerous programs undertaken through the Fit India 
Movement, as part of Khelo India. The Committee also notes that the ASMITA initiative 
launched under the Khelo India scheme has made an impact in promoting women participation 
in sports across India. The Committee appreciates the initiative which covers 20 disciplines now 
and recommends that the Department further enhance the initiative. The Committee recommends 
that the Department continue to focus its efforts on inclusion, i.e., organize programs for women, 
persons with disabilities, and other underrepresented groups. 
(Para 5.8.2 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The observations of the Committee have been duly noted. 
Further, the Khelo India ASMITA initiative has made significant strides in promoting 
women's participation in sports across India. Since its inception in 2021, the ASMITA Women’s 
League has organized over 1271 competitions, impacting more than 1,25,698 women athletes. 
Also, two Editions of Khelo India Para Games have been successfully conducted by this 
Ministry. 
Further, one of the components of Khelo India Scheme “Promotion of rural and indigenous/tribal 
games” is specifically dedicated towards promotion of sports in rural areas and underrepresented 
groups. 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGING PROMOTION AND ACHIEVEMENTS IN PARA-SPORTS 
UNDER TOPS SCHEME 
Recommendation 
39. The Committee notes that the Department of Sports has prioritized promotion of para- 
sports in all spheres through cash incentives, National Sports Awards, dedicated training 
facilities, and support under TOPS scheme. This has resulted in historic wins in international 

 
20 
 
events, including 29 medals in the Paris 2024 Paralympics. The Committee appreciates the 
same. 
(Para 5.8.3 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The observations of the Committee have been duly noted. 
FILLING OF VACANT POSITIONS IN NADA AND DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS 
Recommendation 
40. The Committee notes that India ranks second in doping in the world, which is an 
unfortunate development. However, the Committee appreciates that the crucial role played by 
NADA in guiding and regulating sportspersons to ensure fair play, integrity and adherence to 
anti-doping rules. The Committee notes that the shortage of staff in the Department of Sports and 
the NADA may impact its performance. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the vacant 
positions in all categories of posts should immediately be filled in. 
(Para 5.10.18 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
It is mentioned that NADA has published the vacancy notice for filling up the vacant 
positions by inviting the application for various positions. The recruitment for filling up the 
vacant positions will be completed with due procedures in a time bound manner. Further, for 
filling up the vacancies in the Department of Sports, Department of Personnel & Training is the 
Nodal Department. 
R ACKNOWLEDGING EXPANSION OF DOPE TESTING BY NADA 
Recommendation 
41. The Committee notes and appreciates that the Department and NADA have successfully 
expanded the scale of dope testing by 75% in recent years, from 4,260 tests in 2022 to 7.466 tests 
in 2024. 
(Para 5.10.19 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The observations of the Committee have been duly noted. 
EXPANSION OF NSU PROGRAMS AND ESTABLISHMENT OF A SPORTS SCHOOL 
Recommendation 
42. The Committee noted that the National Sports University offers a Masters in Physical 
Education course for the duration of two years, with the capacity of thirty seats. There is also a 
Bachelors in Physical Education with fifty seats, and a Master of Science in Sports & Coaching 
course with twenty seats. The Committee recommends that the number of seats available under 
these programs be increased. The Committee also recommends that the University be 
accompanied by a sports school to provide educational and residential facilities to sportspersons 
below the age of 18 years. Further, the Committee appreciates the progress in the completion of 
building NSU’s permanent campus in spite of the current disturbances in the state of Manipur. 
(Para 5.11.13 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
 

 
21 
 
Action Taken 
National Sports University (NSU) is presently functioning from a temporary campus with 
limited infrastructure/ resources and is functioning with limited number of seats/ students. The 
seat capacity will be reviewed and suitably enhanced once the University shifts to its permanent 
campus, which is currently under construction. 
With respect to the Committee's suggestion for establishing a sports school for 
sportspersons under 18, it is stated that  a feeder school is part of the university's future 
development plan, which will aim to nurture young talent in alignment with the University's 
broader vision of promoting sports excellence from an early age. 
APPOINTMENT OF VICE-CHANCELLOR, FACULTY RECRUITMENT, AND 
COMPLETION OF NSU PERMANENT CAMPUS 
Recommendation 
43. The Committee notes that the National Sports University in Manipur is the only 
institution of its kind in the country and was established by an Act of Parliament in 2018. It has 
been running from a temporary facility at Khuman Lampak in Imphal while construction 
activities for the permanent campus at Koutruk are ongoing. The Committee notes that the 
University does not currently have a regular Vice-Chancellor or the required faculty. The 
Committee recommends that the construction of the campus be expedited, and that a permanent, 
full-time Vice Chancellor be appointed so that the recruitment of required faculty members may 
also occur. 
(Para 5.11.14 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The process for appointment of a regular Vice-Chancellor of the National Sports 
University is currently underway, and a Search cum-Selection Committee (SCSC) has already 
been constituted for this purpose. Following the appointment of the Vice-Chancellor, the 
recruitment of the requisite faculty and staff across various disciplines and categories will be 
taken up, in accordance with the University's academic and administrative requirements. The 
permanent campus construction is targeted for completion of by November 2025, and all efforts 
are being made to adhere to this timeline to ensure the University functions at full capacity. 
TRAINING HIGH-QUALITY COACHES AND ENSURING MEDICAL SUPPORT FOR 
ATHLETES OVERSEAS 
Recommendation 
44. The Committee recommends that the Department take proactive steps to train high 
quality coaches within the country. Furthermore, the Committee recommends that the 
Department institute a protocol that medical professionals should compulsorily accompany 
sports persons in all Games overseas. 
(Para 5.15.1 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken  
This Department has been supporting/ building capacity/ generating high quality coaches 
through Khelo India. The actions taken are given below: 
 
 Grooming of India Coaches as High Performance Directors and High Performance 

 
22 
 
Managers in KITD 
 Strengthening the capacities of Indian Coaches as Technical Officials through the 
periodic conduct of Khelo India Games 
 
Past champion athletes are being trained in the latest techniques and sports science 
applications through the National Institute of Sports, at no cost to the state or the athletes. Similar 
initiatives have been taken up for the high quality manpower recruited in Khelo India State 
Centre of Excellence. Further a medical team accompanies Indian team in overseas competition 
like Olympics, Asian games etc.  
IMELY ORGANIZATION AND SUPPORT FOR NATIONAL GAMES 
Recommendation 
45. The Committee notes that the National Games are typically organized by the Indian 
Olympic Association (IOA) biennially, but that they weren’t organized between 2015 and 2022, 
partly due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Committee recommends that the Department work 
more closely with the Indian Olympic Association to ensure that the same is not repeated in the 
future. The Committee also recommends that the Department consider supporting the IOA in 
organizing the National Games annually. The Department may assist the IOA with identifying 
cities with the requisite sporting infrastructure and host the games there so as to avoid having to 
incur high expenses on capital expansion. 
(Para 5.16.1 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The National Games are required to be organized biennially. The primary responsibility 
for timely conduct of the National Games is that of Indian Olympic Association (IOA) and the 
concerned host state. 
The 35th National Games were held in Kerala in 2015. The 36th edition was initially 
allotted to Goa but was later reassigned to Gujarat. However, the COVID-19 pandemic further 
delayed the event. Eventually, it took place seven years later, from September 29 to October 12, 
2022, in Gujarat. Subsequently, the 37th National Games were held in Goa from October 25 to 
November 9, 2023. Furthermore, the 38th National Games were recently held from 28th January 
to 14th February, 2025 at Uttarakhand. 
Though the primary responsibility for conduct of National Games is that of the IOA and 
the concerned host state, the Ministry on its part takes up with IOA for timely conduct of 
National Games. 
 
  

 
23 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
TRACKING OFFICIAL VISITS AND ENHANCING YOUTH PARTICIPATION IN 
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION ACTIVITIES 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee was informed that the International Cooperation activities are not only 
for youth delegates. India is a member of various international forms like BRICS, SCO, CICA, 
and UN. For these there are meetings where officials have to go and many times for 
administrative reasons. The Committee was informed that of the 46 participating delegation 
members from India in international cooperation activities in FY2024-25, 22 (48%) were 
officials of the Department of Youth Affairs. The Committee recommends that the visits of the 
officers for such purposes be tracked and budgeted separately. The Committee recommends that 
the Department continue to make endeavour to increase the participation of youth delegates in 
such activities to ensure that the Scheme meets its goals of promoting the exchange of ideas, 
values and culture amongst the youth of different countries. 
(Para 2.5.4 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
It is submitted that the visits of officials to attend international events related to 
multilateral organisations such as BRICS, SCO, CICA, and the United Nations are undertaken on 
the recommendations of the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) and in response to invitations 
received from such organisations. 
The expenditure on the visits of officials is met from the Foreign Travel Expense (FTE) 
Head of the Department, whereas the expenditure on the visits of Youth Delegates is met from 
the budget head “Exchange of Delegation of Youth at International Level – Foreign Travel 
(Other Revenue Expenditure)” under the International Cooperation Sub-Scheme. 
With a view to create an international perspective among youth, promote the exchange of 
ideas, values, and culture, and provide global exposure to Indian youth, the Department has 
initiated the organization of International Seminars in collaboration with Higher Education 
Institutions across India. These seminars cover a wide range of academic and professional fields 
including engineering, medical sciences, arts, dance, yoga, literature, environmental studies, 
social sciences, business management, and other disciplines offered by Indian universities. 
The Department is making continuous efforts to enhance the participation of youth 
delegates in such activities so that the objectives of the Scheme—namely, promoting the 
exchange of ideas, values, and culture among youth of different countries—are effectively 
achieved. 
In the field of international cooperation on youth matters, the Department has recently 
signed three new Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) with Malaysia, Malawi, and Uzbekistan. 
At present, the Department has 32 active MoUs (with 30 countries and 2 multilateral 
organisations).  
 
 

 
24 
 
REPRESENTATION IN YOUTH HOSTEL MANAGEMENT COMMITTEES 
Recommendation 
2. The Committee recommends that the Department work more closely with the State 
Government officials in charge of youth hostels. Accordingly, the Youth Hostel Management 
Committees must have a representative from the State’s Commissioner for Youth affairs and 
Sports. 
(Para 2.6.7 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
As per the Youth Hostel Manual, the day-to-day management of the Youth Hostels is the 
responsibility of the Hostel Management Committee (HMC). For the Youth Hostels located in 
State capitals, Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs of the concerned State/UT Govt. is the 
Chairperson of the H.M.C., whereas, for the Youth Hostels located in districts other than State 
capitals, the Deputy Commissioner/District Magistrate is the chairperson of the H.M.C. 
FUND UTILIZATION AND FUNCTIONING UNDER MERA YUVA BHARAT (MY 
BHARAT) SCHEME 
Recommendation 
3. The Committee notes that the performances and the achievements of the Nehru Yuva 
Kendra and all programme conducted by the DoYA under different schemes are reported on the 
My Bharat portal. The Committee noted that according to the figures for FY 2024-25 provided 
above, the expenditure as on 31.01.25 under the Scheme stood only at Rs. 7.50Crores, which is a 
gross underutilisation of funds. The Committee was informed that the utilization of the fund was 
for establishing Mera Yuva Bharat (MY Bharat) as an autonomous body. The reason provided 
that decrease of expenditure is due to trend, does not suffice. The Committee observes that the 
Budget for the FY 2025-26 has been decreased. The Committee would like to know as to how this 
cut would affect the functioning of the Scheme. 
(Para 2.8.10 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Mera Yuva Bharat (MY Bharat) has been created to function as an overarching 
mechanism and operates as a unifying platform that adopts a Whole-of-Government approach to 
streamline, synergize, and scale youth-centric initiatives. Thus the activities under the various 
schemes of the Department are being reported under MY Bharat. 
As compared to 31.01.2025 at the end of the FY on 31.03.2025 a total amount of Rs. 
22.09 Cr. has been released for utilization against various programmes w.r.t. MY Bharat. 
It is expected that once the manpower for the organization is in place the pace of 
expenditure will improve. The programmes of MY Bharat are evolving, thus the additional funds 
required, if any, will be sought at RE stage/supplementary demand of grants. 
RECOGNITION AND TAX EXEMPTION FOR SPORTS PERSONS’ AWARDS 
Recommendation 
4.  The Committee appreciates the Schemes which provide incentives and special cash awards to the sports persons in recognition of their talents and the laurels they bought to the country, including the National Sports Awards, Cash Incentives, post-retirement pension etc. 

 
25 
 
The Govt. of India also provides a quota to sports persons in jobs (upto5%). Besides this, for Welfare, scheme for financial assistance to sports persons with poor financial condition is also operative. The Committee however recommends that more be done to recognize our sports persons. The prize money sports persons win in prestigious competitions may be declared tax-exempt. 
(Para 5.1.5 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The Department of Sports is already making sincere efforts for welfare for the 
sportspersons though various schemes. However, the authority to grant tax exemptions on award 
money lies with the Department of Revenue under the Ministry of Finance, Government of India. 
However, the observations of the Committee have been duly noted. 
PREVENTION OF AGE FRAUD IN SPORTS 
Recommendation 
5. The Committee notes that another major issue that really hurts young sportspersons is 
that of over-age children competing in lower age groups. The Committee recommends that the 
Department consider solutions to this issue. 
(Para 5.6.19 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
For prevention of age fraud in sports, the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports has issued 
guidelines under the ‘National Code Against Age Fraud in Sports’ (NCAAFS), effective from 1st 
April 2010. Under NCAAFS 2010, concerned sports bodies such as National Sports Federations 
(NSFs) and Sports Authority of India (SAI) are required to get all the players in age level 
competitions medically examined at the time of registration or allowing a new athlete to 
participate in an event and issue them identity card. 
In terms of NCAAFS 2010, SAI carries out the age verification tests before admitting an 
athlete into its Sports Promotion Schemes. Likewise, NSFs are entrusted with the responsibility 
of carrying out age verification tests in accordance with the NCAAFS 2010. 
Further, the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports has put in the public domain the Draft 
National Code Against Age Fraud in Sports (NCAAFS) 2025 for inviting comments/ suggestions 
from the general public and stakeholders, as part of the consultation process. 
The Code aims to: 
 Ensure fair competition by preventing age fraud, which compromises the integrity of 
sports. 
 Implement a robust verification system for age determination through a centralized 
database. 
 Introduce strict penalties for athletes, coaches, and officials found guilty of falsifying age 
records. 
 Enhance transparency and accountability in sports governance by aligning with 
international best practices. 
 

 
26 
 
The draft NCAAFS is at consultation stage. Once finalized it will be applicable to all 
athletes, coaches, officials, administrators, and support personnel involved inrecognized National 
Sports Federations (NSFs), Sports Authority of India (SAI), Sports Control Boards managed by 
Central Government departments and Central Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) and NGOs, 
NSPOs, public/private agencies, and institutions promoting sports development. 
HOSTEL AND RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AT SAI REGIONAL CENTRES 
Recommendation 
6. The Committee recommended that all SAI regional centers must have adequate hostel 
capacity to provide residential facilities for all sportspersons. The Department is recommended 
to provide funds for the same. 
(Para 5.6.20 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Over the years, SAI has made significant investments in the development of residential 
infrastructure across its centres. As a result, more than 7,500 residential athletes are currently 
availing boarding and lodging facilities at various SAI Regional Centres, National Centres of 
Excellence (NCOEs), and SAI Training Centres (STCs). 
 
However, in STCs providing residential facilities is the responsibility of State 
Governments. 
In addition, non-residential training facilities are also operational to support local talent, 
enabling them to participate as day boarders under the respective schemes. 
  

 
27 
 
 
CHAPTER III  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
FILLING VACANCIES IN NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS) / MERA 
YUVA BHARAT (MY BHARAT) 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee observes that the sanctioned strength for Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan 
is 2,273, but that the number of positions filled is only 1,184. There are therefore 1,089 vacant 
positions. The Ministry in its response noted that before Covid, three initiatives were taken 
through which District Youth Officers were given employment in NYKS. Post the COVID-19 
pandemic, the NYKS became an autonomous body, so these vacancies are no longer filled 
through the UPSC or the Staff Selection Commission but through the Institute of Banking 
Personnel Selection (IBPS), as per the decision of the Governing Board. These vacancies must 
be filled at the soonest.  
(Para 2.2.6 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
The Government has taken several steps to fill all vacant post of MY Bharat across the 
country. Between 2018 and 2021, a total of 831 vacant posts were filled through direct 
recruitment on an all-India basis. However, it is informed that filling up of vacancies prior to 
restructuring of MY Bharat has never been done through UPSC or SSC however through 
IBPS(Indian Banking Personnel Selection).  
Board of Governors have taken a decision to recruit the level 10 officers from the UPSC-
CSE waitlisted candidates through Pratibha Setu and for other posts from SSC waitlisted list. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
The Committee is constrained to observe that Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan 
(NYKS) is facing ongoing vacancy issues for various posts. The Committee also notes that 
Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) is being rebranded/integrated into a new national 
initiative called Mera Yuva Bharat (MY Bharat), which acts as an autonomous body under 
the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports.  The Committee is of the view that Nehru Yuva 
Kendra Sangathan/ Mera Yuva Bharat (MY Bharat) will not able to discharge its functions 
with   more than 50% of its posts remaining vacant. The Ministry has informed that the 
Board of Governors have taken a decision to recruit the level 10 officers from the UPSC-
CSE waitlisted candidates through Pratibha Setu and for other posts from SSC waitlisted 
list. However, action on ground is still due in this regard. The Committee therefore 
recommends that all efforts must be made by the Department to fill up the vacancies and 
inform the Committee about the same.  
EXPEDITIOUS RESTRUCTURING AND FILLING OF VACANT POSTS IN MY 
BHARAT 
Recommendation 
2. The Committee notes with concern that of the sanctioned post of 560 District Youth 
Officer, a total of 240 posts are lying vacant, and that the last direct recruitment process was 
carried out in the year FY 2019-20. The NYKS designs its core programmes keeping the District 

 
28 
 
as a base unit for conduct of the programme. The Committee was informed that in the absence of 
regular District Youth Officer, additional charge of the said districts has been assigned to 
officials from neighboring Kendras. The fact that the existing DYOs have been tasked with 
running multiple Nehru Yuva Kendras is a constraint on their ability to effectively run the 
programs under this scheme. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Department 
conduct recruitment to fill all existing vacancies. An additional demand of funds may be 
submitted to the Finance Ministry at RE stage of FY 2025-26. 
(Para 2.2.7 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
After restructuring, MY Bharat shall have a DYO in each district. Rest is as above. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
The Committee finds such huge vacancies of District Youth Officer extremely 
alarming. Burdening the existing officers with the charge of additional districts 
undoubtedly undermines their efficiency of working. The Committee recommends the 
Department to complete the restructuring of MY Bharat expeditiously, fill up all the vacant 
posts as soon as possible. 
 
EXPEDITED OPENING OF RESTRUCTURED MY BHARAT KENDRAS IN ALL 
DISTRICTS 
Recommendation 
3. The Committee notes that a separate NYKS has not been established in every district of 
the country. It has been created only in 623 districts, while the number of districts in the country 
totals 788 districts. The new districts do not have staff positions sanctioned yet nor a Nehru Yuva 
Kendra. Therefore, taking a comprehensive view of staff positions, the Committee observes that 
the current sanctioned positions may be insufficient for the discharge of the NYKS 
responsibilities across all districts in the country. Therefore, in addition to the filling of 
vacancies, the number of sanctioned posts in the NYKS may need to be enhanced, and funds need 
to be provided for expansion of the organization in all districts. 
(Para 2.2.8 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Restructured MY Bharat Kendras will be in all the Districts as per order issued by 
Ministry of Finance (DOE) dated 07.05.2025. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
The Committee therefore recommends that Restructured MY Bharat Kendras 
should be opened in all the Districts of the Country at the earliest and action taken by the 
govt. in the matter should be informed to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 

 
29 
 
ENSURING PROPER UTILIZATION OF YOUTH HOSTELS BY VIGOROUS 
FOLLOW-UP WITH STATE GOVERNMENTS 
Recommendation 
4. The Committee was informed that several State Governments are using the buildings of 
the Youth Hostels for activities other than youth hostelling and that the Department has made 
numerous requests for vacation of these premises to the concerned State Government. The 
Committee notes this concern and recommends that the Department continue to take action for 
the same. 
(Para 2.6.5 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Further, the Ministry will continue to 
pursue the matter with the concerned State Governments. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
The Committee is not at all convinced with the reply of the Ministry that they will 
continue to pursue the matter with the state government. The Committee therefore 
recommends the Department to vigorously pursue the matter with the concerned state 
governments so that the youth hostels are not used for any purpose other than they are 
meant to be.  
 
ENSURING FULL UTILIZATION OF ALLOCATED FUNDS BY RGNIYD 
Recommendation 
5. The Committee observed that for the FY 2024-25 the utilization of funds as on 31.01.25 is 
just Rs. 16Crores while the RE for the year was Rs. 23.50 crores. This is a notable under 
utilisation of funds. However, the reason quoted while seeking the funds for BE 2025-26 are 
disbursement of salaries and recruitment of Teaching and non-teaching staff. The Committee 
notes that the RGNIYD has been entrusted with the responsibility for training, documentation, 
research and evaluation and extension for all youth related activities in the country. The Institute 
should be more pro-active in its utilisation of funds to deliver on its mission. 
(Para 2.10.14 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
Action Taken 
RGNIYD has utilized Rs.19.80 crore as per actual estimates.   
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
The Committee notes that out of a revised allocation of Rs. 23.50 crores for the FY 
2024-25, RGNIYD has utilized Rs.19.80 crore. It means Rs. 3.7 crores remained unutilized. 
As RGNIYD is an Institution of National Importance by the Act of Parliament, the 
Committee recommends the Department to make all efforts that the allocation made to the 
Institution is fully utilized by it in future.  
ESTABLISHING RESIDENTIAL SPORTS SCHOOLS AT NCOES AND SAI 
REGIONAL CENTRES TO INTEGRATE EDUCATION AND TRAINING 
 

 
30 
 
Recommendation 
6. The Committee recommends that young sportspersons should be supported in their 
academic journeys so as to not have to be forced to choose between the two. Accordingly, the 
Committee recommends that all NCOEs and SAI regional centers establish residential sports 
schools with curriculum and school structure developed to specifically support sportspersons. 
(Para 5.3.14 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
At present, SAI athletes are provided an educational allowance as per their entitlements 
under the respective schemes, such as SAI Training Centres (STCs) etc. They are also enrolled in 
nearby schools and colleges to ensure continuity in their academic progress alongside sports 
training. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee  
The Committee notes that even though the NCOEs provides Boarding & Lodging, 
Education Allowance, Medical Insurance, specialized training, state-of-the-art 
infrastructure, etc. but these Centers of Excellence do not combine sports with education. 
As a result, the formal education of these athletes lags behind. The Committee feels that it 
would be impractical for the athletes to train at one Centre and there after run to some 
other Institution at a distant place for his or her education. The Committee has already 
examined these issues in some detail in its 369th Report. The Committee therefore reiterates 
its earlier recommendation that the educational needs of such athletes should also be taken 
care of in the institution itself. The Centers of Excellence besides giving full coaching of 
that game, make such arrangements that an athlete do not have to lose out on his or her 
education or make a choice between sports and education. The Committee again 
recommends that all NCOEs and SAI regional centers should establish residential sports 
schools and higher education institutions with curriculum and school structure developed 
to specifically support sportspersons.  
TIMELY RECRUITMENT OF SPORTS SCIENCE AND OTHER CADRES IN SAI 
Recommendation 
7. The Committee observed from the data given above, that the recruitment situation in SAI 
is really needs attention. The staff position in Administrative cadre, Rajbhasha, Engineers & 
Sports Science (regular) Group A and B, Coaching Cadre, contractual personnel needs to be 
filled up as urgently as possible. The Committee notes that such vacancies inevitably 
compromise the functioning of the institution. 
(Para 5.6.18 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The recruitment for the Sports Science cadre is currently on hold due to an ongoing court 
case. However, the recruitment for various positions under the Administrative Cadre, Rajbhasha, 
Engineering, Coaching Cadre, and contractual personnel is under process in SAI. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee  
It is an undisputed fact that Sports science is crucial for maximizing athletic 
performance, preventing injuries, and improving overall health by applying scientific 
principles (physiology, biomechanics, psychology, nutrition) to training, recovery, and 

 
31 
 
lifestyle, creating tailored plans for athletes to achieve peak potential safely and effectively, 
while also driving innovation in equipment and fitness. Therefore, keeping the recruitment 
for the Sports Science cadre on hold severely affects the performance of the athlete.   The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take all efforts to resolve 
the court case as soon as possible and fill up the vacant posts of Sports Science cadre in 
SAI. Further, the recruitment for various positions under the Administrative Cadre, 
Rajbhasha, Engineering, Coaching Cadre, and contractual personnel which is under 
process in SAI must also be completed in a time bound manner. 
EXPEDITED RECRUITMENT AND PROMOTION OF COACHES IN SAI 
Recommendation 
8. The Committee was informed that “As per the Recruitment Rules for the Coaching 
Cadre, a total of 1,524 posts have been sanctioned across all positions within the Coaching 
Cadre, including HPC, Coach, Senior Coach, Assistant Coach, and Chief Coach. Out of these 
1,524 sanctioned posts, 685 are designated for contractual or deputation engagement. However, 
against these 685 posts, 307 coaches were working in the FY2024.” The Committee recommends 
that this trend of contractual coaching positions must be halted. 
(Para 5.6.21 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The regular recruitment for the post of Assistant Coaches is currently under process in 
SAI. However, the positions of Coach, Senior Coach, Chief Coach, and High Performance 
Coach (HPC) are promotional posts under the Recruitment Rules of SAI. Efforts are being made 
to fill these promotional positions by providing one-time relaxation in the qualifying service to 
address the operational requirements of SAI. The promotion process for various Coaching posts 
is under active consideration. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee  
The Committee is not satisfied with the position that out of 685 designated posts in 
SAI, for contractual or deputation engagement, only 307 coaches were working in the 
FY2024. The scarcity of coaches is therefore dire. The Committee hence recommends the 
Department to complete the recruitment process of Assistant Coaches by the end of the 
current financial year. Similarly, it should take all necessary steps so that the promotional 
posts of High Performance Coach (HPC) too are filled up as soon as possible.  
ENHANCEMENT OF MONTHLY PENSION FOR MERITORIOUS SPORTSPERSONS 
Recommendation 
9. The Committee notes that the Department has provisioned for post-retirement support for 
ex-sportspersons who have brought laurels to the country, and that over 850 sportspersons have 
been awarded lifelong pension ranging up to Rs. 20,000/- per month. The Committee observes 
that the career of sports persons and their pensions should be made lucrative so that the 
required talent is attracted and retained properly. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that 
the pension due to meritorious sportspersons be not less than the pension accorded to a retired 
Class 1 Officer. 
 (Para 5.12.1 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The pension scheme was revised in 2018, resulting in an increase in the pension amount.  

 
32 
 
Further, during the current FY (2025-26), the Scheme of Pension to Meritorious 
Sportsperson will be placed before the Competent Authority for continuation beyond the five-
year period (i.e. 2021-22 to 2025-26). 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee  
The Committee observes that the Scheme of Sports Fund for Pension to Meritorious 
Sportspersons is an important scheme to provide additional financial security to 
sportspersons post retirement from active sports career in the form of life-time pension. 
Under this scheme, sportspersons, who have won Gold, Silver or Bronze medals in Olympic 
Games, World Cup in Olympics and Asian Games disciplines, Asian Games, 
Commonwealth Games and Para-Olympic Game are given a monthly pension for life of an 
amount of Rs 12,000 to 20,000. However, this amount was last amended in the year 2018. 
As the cost of living has increased substantially during the last seven years,   Committee 
strongly recommends that the monthly pension of Meritorious Sportspersons should also 
be increased commensurately, akin to that a retired Class I officer.   

 
33 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
NIL 

 
34 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE 
1. The Committee is constrained to observe that Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan 
(NYKS) is facing ongoing vacancy issues for various posts. The Committee also notes that 
Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) is being rebranded/integrated into a new national 
initiative called Mera Yuva Bharat (MY Bharat), which acts as an autonomous body under 
the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports.  The Committee is of the view that Nehru Yuva 
Kendra Sangathan/ Mera Yuva Bharat (MY Bharat) will not able to discharge its functions 
with   more than 50% of its posts remaining vacant. The Ministry has informed that the 
Board of Governors have taken a decision to recruit the level 10 officers from the UPSC-
CSE waitlisted candidates through Pratibha Setu and for other posts from SSC waitlisted 
list. However, action on ground is still due in this regard. The Committee therefore 
recommends that all efforts must be made by the Department to fill up the vacancies and 
inform the Committee about the same.  
(Para 2.2.6 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
2. The Committee finds such huge vacancies of District Youth Officer extremely 
alarming. Burdening the existing officers with the charge of additional districts 
undoubtedly undermines their efficiency of working. The Committee recommends the 
Department to complete the restructuring of MY Bharat expeditiously, fill up all the vacant 
posts as soon as possible. 
(Para 2.2.7 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
 
3. The Committee therefore recommends that Restructured MY Bharat Kendras 
should be opened in all the Districts of the Country at the earliest and action taken by the 
govt. in the matter should be informed to the Committee. 
(Para 2.2.8 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
4. The Committee is not at all convinced with the reply of the Ministry that they will 
continue to pursue the matter with the state government. The Committee therefore 
recommends the Department to vigorously pursue the matter with the concerned state 
governments so that the youth hostels are not used for any purpose other than they are 
meant to be.  
(Para 2.6.5 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
5. The Committee notes that out of a revised allocation of Rs. 23.50 crores for the FY 
2024-25, RGNIYD has utilized Rs.19.80 crore. It means Rs. 3.7 crores remained unutilized. 
As RGNIYD is an Institution of National Importance by the Act of Parliament, the 
Committee recommends the Department to make all efforts that the allocation made to the 
Institution is fully utilized by it in future.  
(Para 2.10.14 of the 366th Report of the Committee)  
6. The Committee notes that even though the NCOEs provides Boarding & Lodging, 
Education Allowance, Medical Insurance, specialized training, state-of-the-art 
infrastructure, etc. but these Centers of Excellence do not combine sports with education. 
As a result, the formal education of these athletes lags behind. The Committee feels that it 
would be impractical for the athletes to train at one Centre and there after run to some 
other Institution at a distant place for his or her education. The Committee has already 

 
35 
 
examined these issues in some detail in its 369th Report. The Committee therefore reiterates 
its earlier recommendation that the educational needs of such athletes should also be taken 
care of in the institution itself. The Centers of Excellence besides giving full coaching of 
that game, make such arrangements that an athlete do not have to lose out on his or her 
education or make a choice between sports and education. The Committee again 
recommends that all NCOEs and SAI regional centers should establish residential sports 
schools and higher education institutions with curriculum and school structure developed 
to specifically support sportspersons.  
(Para 5.3.14 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
7. It is an undisputed fact that Sports science is crucial for maximizing athletic 
performance, preventing injuries, and improving overall health by applying scientific 
principles (physiology, biomechanics, psychology, nutrition) to training, recovery, and 
lifestyle, creating tailored plans for athletes to achieve peak potential safely and effectively, 
while also driving innovation in equipment and fitness. Therefore, keeping the recruitment 
for the Sports Science cadre on hold severely affects the performance of the athlete.   The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take all efforts to resolve 
the court case as soon as possible and fill up the vacant posts of Sports Science cadre in 
SAI. Further, the recruitment for various positions under the Administrative Cadre, 
Rajbhasha, Engineering, Coaching Cadre, and contractual personnel which is under 
process in SAI must also be completed in a time bound manner. 
(Para 5.6.18 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
8. The Committee is not satisfied with the position that out of 685 designated posts in 
SAI, for contractual or deputation engagement, only 307 coaches were working in the 
FY2024. The scarcity of coaches is therefore dire. The Committee hence recommends the 
Department to complete the recruitment process of Assistant Coaches by the end of the 
current financial year. Similarly, it should take all necessary steps so that the promotional 
posts of High Performance Coach (HPC) too are filled up as soon as possible.  
(Para 5.6.21 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 
9. The Committee observes that the Scheme of Sports Fund for Pension to Meritorious 
Sportspersons is an important scheme to provide additional financial security to 
sportspersons post retirement from active sports career in the form of life-time pension. 
Under this scheme, sportspersons, who have won Gold, Silver or Bronze medals in Olympic 
Games, World Cup in Olympics and Asian Games disciplines, Asian Games, 
Commonwealth Games and Para-Olympic Game are given a monthly pension for life of an 
amount of Rs 12,000 to 20,000. However, this amount was last amended in the year 2018. 
As the cost of living has increased substantially during the last seven years,   Committee 
strongly recommends that the monthly pension of Meritorious Sportspersons should also 
be increased commensurately, akin to that a retired Class I officer.  
(Para 5.12.1 of the 366th Report of the Committee) 