Err ate to the Forty-Fifth Report on Demands for Grants 
1996-97 _(Demand No. 39) of the Department of Health. 
Sl. No. Page Para Line For Read . 
No. No. No. 
1. . 8 5.7 12 Appriasal Appraisal 
2. 9 5.9 12 Explaning Explaining 
3. 19 6. 4 formularly formulat·y 
4. 21 . 26 1 Poly-clines Poly-clinic$ 
5. 31 6 3 Suggetions Suggestions 
6. 31 13· 3 Feel Feels 
7. 32 3 2 kindney kidney 
8. 32 12 1 Institutute Institute 
9. 34 7 3 Multi-Storyed Multi-Storeyed 
10. 34 8 4 Gyane Gynae 
11. 36 10 2 filed filled 

; 
' .. )! 
...... 
-·· 
k f::.· ., 
·; 
! 
:I 
J 
~ -~ : .. 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
FORTY-FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1996-97 (DEMAND NO. 39) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 30.8.1996) · 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30.8.1996) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August 1996/Bhadra 1918 (Saka) 
. ' 
- . ;_:·--or:. - "" ... ; 
>:_~ -);~: :~ ---~: _, 4;-,:.=' ·-.~:··~::::_-z~;·y -;._j:~:+ 

CONTENTS 
1. CoMPOSITION OF THE CoMMITTEE 
2. PREFACE 
3. REPORT 
(I) Introduction 
(II) Central Government Health Scheme 
(III) Hospitals and Dispensaries 
(IV) Medical Education, Training and Research 
(i) Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute 
(ii) Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Science, Sevagram, Wardha 
(iii) Cancer Research · 
(V) National Health Programmes 
(i) National Malaria Eradication Programme 
(ii) National Leprosy Eradication Programme 
(iii) National TB Control Programme 
(iv) National AIDS Control Programme 
(v) National Mental Health Programme 
(vi) Kala Azar Control Programme 
(vii) National Iodine Deficiency Disorder Programme 
(viii)Prevention of Deafness and Hearing Impairment Programme 
(ix) National Programme for Control of Blindness 
(VI) Prevention of Food Adulteration 
(VII) Nursing Services 
(VIII) Availability of Spurious Drugs 
(IX) Primary Health Centres 
(X) New Schemes 
(i) YAWS Eradication Programme 
-(-ii) Hospital Waste Management 
(iii) Development of Public Private Partnership and Joint .Sector 
Approach 
(iv) National Illness Assistance Fund 
(v) Blood Transfusion Councils 
4. ANNEXURE-I 
ANNEXUR E-II 
5. MINUTES 
PAGES 
(i)-(ii) 
(iii) 
(1-18) 
1--4 
4 
5 
5-7 
6 
6-7 
7 
7-14 
7-9 
9 
9-10 
10--11 
11-12 
12-13 
13,-14 
14 
14 
14-15 
15 
15 
15-16 
17-18 
17 
17 
17 
17 
17-18 
19-22 
23--37 
41--43 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITIEE 
1. Shri S. B. Chavan-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
3. Dr. B.B. Dutta 
4. Dr. M. Aram 
5. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik 
6. Dr. Shri.kant Ramchandra Jichkar 
7. Shri Raj Nath Singh ' 
8. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
9. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Vanna 
10. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
11. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray 
12. Shri R. Margabandu 
13. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha 
14. Dr. Mohan Babu 
15. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
17. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
18. Shri Sartaj Singh 
19. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shaky a 
20. Shri Jai Prakash 
21. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
22. Shrimati Divya Singh 
23. Shri Mahant Abedyanath 
24. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh 
25. Chaudhary Paragi La! 
26. Dr. C. Silvera 
27. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda 
28. Shri Dutta Meghe 
29. Shri I. G. Sanadi 
30. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose 
31. Shri P. V. Rajeshwar Rao 
32. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy 
33. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi 
34. Shri Pawan Diwan 
35. Shri Krishna 
36. Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigi 
37. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
38. Shri Samik -Lahiri 
39. Shri S.K. Karvendhan 
40. Shri Mukhtar Anees 
(i) ·. 

. ·, 
-: : 
I .-
.. . 
·.· 
41. Dr. M. Jagannath 
42. Dr. Bali Ram 
43. Shri Ranen Barman 
44. Shri Surender Singh 
45. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director 
(ii) 
Shri P.P .K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary 
Shri J.G. Negi , Committee Officer 
. . ' . . . - . . ~.' .. • . . . . . • . . . ·- : < '. . . . . • . . . . . . ... .. ~-. .• 
··.: .. :-~~ ~-- < . : · -~ .. :-= ·i __ ·:·. --_; . ~!: .· :=:·. ~ . · .... _ .;~. _~. ·. ·:··· .... : .... _: .-_ .::= .. -. -~~·-})-:_;_: .. =:=- ~~ ::.-::.: :~ ._ -. .. ·· · :·_··.::·~:_·_·-~:~_- ·_:_:. :_:~_· :._:~_-, .. ~c.:._.-.... _=~~:r .. ~.-~ __ :._. ; __ -.;_:_:.:_.~ ·.-.·.: .. :::._~.=·,_.:_·_ . . . -.~·-·_·._:_ .. '.·:·_:··~=.-~ ... ::_.:._:·_··:····:: ___ ._: .. · .:·:·_·_._._·_=·· ·_·._·:.~: .. ::=·_,'.'-~-~---~:_ ~-:-··.·:·-·_=_: __ ·.· •• -_:··.··.·.·- -:--'· .. ·.-~_··.·,- _ .. _· _.·.·:· ·.-: 
/\(·=>t<<c_::c~ -~~ <: ~ ===::: <-- ··:;:·=~·: ... ·;·<·· ::Y:0:~~-: : .. ;·>.::::~(~>~: : -·;:-. :-~- · -- - --- - · · .-::=-·. 

PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Forty-fifth Report of the Committee on the 
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 39) of the Department of Health, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare for the year 1996-~7. 
2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from 
the Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and also heard the 
Secretary and other Officials of that Department on the said Demands for Grants in its 
meeting held on 9th August, 1996. 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on 24th August, 
1996. 
New DELHI; 
August 24, 1996 
Bhadra, 1918 (Saka) 
· , · . . . · _. .··. ·: 
(iii) 
S.B. CHAVAN 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on 
Human Resource Development. 
. ·.. . . . . . ' . . . . : .. ~ .... · . 
>.· .• ·: . : •. ··.... .· •..• · ... ;: .· ~·:·: 

; .J. 
REPORT 
I. INTRODUCTION 
1.1. The Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is instrumental and responsible 
for implementation of various programmes of national importance like family welfare, 
primary health care, prevention, control and eradication of major diseases which form the 
main plank of our development efforts. Apart from these, the Ministry also takes special 
care for preventing the spread of diseases assuming the dimension of epidemic. The 
Department of Health, under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, which is 
committed to achieve the goal of health for all by the year 2000 A.D. is responsible for 
evolving broad policies for the health sector and provides financial and technical assistance · 
to State Governments in critical areas through the implementation of important health 
programmes. 
1.2. Broadly, the objectives of the Department are to undertake National Health 
Programmes, to promote education, research and training in various medical disciplines, to 
prevent adu.Iteration of food as well as drugs, to provide primary health care at the door 
steps of the people, to take steps for better implementation of health care programmes for 
tribal and other weaker sections of the society and also to collaborate with member countries 
of United Nations and international agencies like WHO, UNICEF, etc. in matters relating 
to health promotion and development, etc. 
1.3. The Department finances a number of health programmes aimed at controlling 
Malaria, Leprosy, Blindness, AIDS, TB, Gunieawarm either on 100 per cent or on 50 per 
cent basis. The Department also finances wholly or substantially autonomous institutions 
engaged in patient care and or research such as All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research , Chandigarh, All India Institute 
of Speech and Hearing, Mysore, Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi, National 
Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore etc. The Department also assists 
voluntary organisations and institutions substantially such as Indian Red Cross Society, New 
Delhi, Tuberculosis Centre, New Delhi, Lala Ram Swarup TB Hospital, Mehrauli, etc. 
1.4. The health infrastructure comprises of 2,385 Community Health Centres, 1,693 
Primary Health Centres and 1,31,900 Sub-centres. Some of the new programmes initiated 
·during the current financial year by the Department are Urban Hospital Waste 
Management, Setting up of National Illness Assistance Fund and National Blood Transfusion 
Council, Development of Public Private Partnership and Joint Sector Approach and 
Epidemiological Surveillance and Support System, etc. Pilot projects on Diabetes Control, 
Oral Health, Prevention of deafness and hearing impairment, micro nutrient, malnutrition, 
. medical rahabilitation and cardio-vascular diseases have also been initiated. 
1.5. The overall proportion of the Budget to the Health sector has not increased since 
the beginning of the first Plan. The Health Sector including Family Welfare has been getting 
only abo\tt 3 per cent of the total outlays through the successive Five-Year Plans. The 
Working Group for Health Financing set up by the Planning Commission for the 8th Five 
Year Plan had .recommended that the Health Sector allocation should not be less than 5% of 
the total outlay. The Fourth Conference of Central Council of Health and Family Welfart>. 
has recommended that the direct investment by the Government should be raised .to a 
minimum o(S per cent of the GDP and the total investment in health could go up to 10 per 
cent. The World Health Organisation (WHO) also recommended that the public health care 
expenditure should be at least 5 per cent of the GDP if equity and universal coverage is to 
be realised. However, as per the figures available, the total investment on health and family 
1 
.: ··· ··. :. ·. :· .. ·: .. ·. · 
·:::. =·: 

2 
sector is still about 6% of the GDP of which 1.3% is by the Governmen t and the rest by the 
private sector. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommend ation made last year that 
the goal of spending 5 per cent of GDP on health sector by 2000 AD should be kept in mind 
while finalising Ninth Plan proposals. The Government should provide additional allocations 
at the RE stage keeping in view the objects of achieving the goal of Health for All by 
2000 A.D. At the !;tart of the 8th Five Year Plan, there were in total 81 Schemes continuing. 
for continuing these schemes during the 8th Five Year Plan, the financial implications are 
Rs.1,800 crores. Besides these Schemes, 17 new Schemes have been taken up during the 8th 
Plan period which required Rs. 309.07 crores. The overall Foreign Aid component during 
the period of 1992-93 to 1996-97 is Rs. 861.35 crores. The approved Plan allocation made in 
all the successive Annual Plans including 1996-97 is Rs. 3065.11 crores. The 8th Plan 
expenditure made by the Department upto 1995-96 is about Rs. 1900 crores. The Physical 
targets fixed and the achievements made under the major National Health Programmes are 
as under:-
1. National Malaria Eradication Programme 
Malaria cases detected and traced 
Year Malaria Cases P.F. Cases Deaths 
(in million) (in million) 
1991 2.11 0.92 421 
1992 2.13 0.88 422 
1993 2.20 0.85 354 
1994 2.51 0.99 1122 
1995 2.80 1.09 1061 
2. National Leprosy Eradication Programme 
(Figures in 'ODDs) 
Year Case Detection Case Treatment Case Discharge 
Target Achievement Target Achievement Target Achievement 
1992-93 289 547 289 541 573 1052 
1993-94 265 494 265 486 525 719 
1994-95 224 429 .. ' 224 419 424 I 626 
1995-96 225 434 225 420 ! 425 613 :. 
'T4 
~ 
·. 
~ 
-L {: 
~~ 
-~ 
·:: 
.. .. 
).L; 
1',,' .;. 
r: I ···.· 
:::~.:: . 
p{2i 
r ,•' 
r. 
~ . 
u:·:. :\· 
'I 
' . 
·v=· (:. 
I 
1.:: 
I 
' .. , 
k~, 
~ - ·. 
·· .. 
'. 

r . .._ 
' ! 
: .... -~ .~ ... ' . . ~ ~-- . .·::• . . ~- '~ ... .; 
3 
3. National T.B. Control Programme 
(Cases in Jakhs) 
1992-93 1993-94 1994-95 1995-96 
Target Achiev. Target Achiev. Target Achiev. Target Achiev. 
New T.B. Cases 17.50 15.39 18.00 11.80 19.00 12.49 12.70 13.90 
Sputum Examination 33.96 27.53 34.00 22.41 34.00 22.41 35.99 24.02 
4. National Programmt' for Control of Blindness 
Performance of Cataract operation 
Year 
1992-93 
1993-94 
1994-95 
1995-96 
1996-97 
5.. National AIDS Control Programme 
Target 
20.00 
24.30 
24.50 
25.50 
26.20 
(Cases in Jakhs) 
Achievements 
16.05 
19.10 
21.56 
24.66 
• 154 zonal blood testing centres established during the last 4 years. 
• 199 Blood Banks modernised during 1995-96. 
* 128 Medical Officer, 747 Blood Bank Technicians and 37 Drug Inspectors imparted 
in service training. 
* 372 existing STD clinics being strengthened. 
1.6. The Secretary, Department of Health, while deposing before the Committee stated 
that the Planning Commission was requested to allocate Rs. 1058.79 crores to the 
Department of Health and Department of ISM & H for the year 1996-97. As against this, an 
allocation of Rs. 829.17 crores was originally agreed to by the Planning Commission for the 
Department of Health. This has, however, been reduced to Rs. 791.81 crores in the final 
allocations , out of which Rs. 370 crores is foreign aid component. The approved outlay for 
the 8th Plan was Rs. 1712.01 crores. 
1.7. The additional requirement of funds by the Department of Health are as under: 
(i) Additional allocation as agreed to originally by Planning 
Commission required for Nat~onal Programmes Rs. 37.36 crores 
(ii) AIIMS - Development of Cardia-Thoracic and Neuro-
Sciences Centre Rs. 42.50 crores 
(iii) Kalawati Saran Children Hospital Project by Japan 
International Corporation Agency (JICA) 
Rs. 6.01 crores Externally Aided Component 
Rs. 12.61 crores 
·· .. s: ···: :::--.. ·'. :::.:::·: -::-: -~ ..... =t: : ·~·::~_::: ::·:;fi~~~~::; ~·~~ .. :~:~~;.:i_~:::t:~L .. :/N_~~~.~;!~.I~t:_= ~t: ~-
;- · -·· 
.. •,l. ·.··: •• 
:-

..>-
( 
Rs. 6.60 crores General Component 
(iv) National T.B. Control Programme 
ToTAL 
Rs. 8.38 crores 
Rs. 100.85 crores 
1.8 The Committee feels that one of the important factors leading to rise in various 
diseases is the unhygienic conditions and lack of cleanliness all around in the public life. 
Conceding to this fact, the Secretary stated tha·t a Committee under the Convenorship of 
Shri M.S. Dayal, former Health Secretary, was constituted to examine this problem. The 
task of the Committee was to examine the ground situation and evolving Comprehensive · 
National Programme on Sanitation and Environmental Hygiene on the lines of a Technology 
Mission. The Committee submitted its report in July, 1995. The Department has further 
stated that the Committee of Secretaries discussed the matter and ·suggested that the . 
recommendations contained in the Dayal Committee Report pertaining to various Ministries/ 
Departments concerned with environment and sanitation may incorporate them in their 
respective 9th Plan proposals. The Committee desires that it should be given utmost priority 
in view of the deteriorating unhygienic conditions in public life. There is also an urgent need 
to educate people about civic sense and maintenance of cleanliness all around as unhygienic 
conditions are the root cause of many diseases especially the communicable disease. 
II. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS) 
2.1 The Plan aliocation provided to the CGHS had been reduced from 7 crores in 
Budget Estimates for 1995-96 to Rs. 6.07 crores in RE 1995-96 and has further been slashed 
to Rs. 6 crores in BE 1996-97. When the Department was asked to explain the reasons for 
reduction the Department have stated that the CGHS was allocated Rs. 7 crores under BE 
.1995-96 (Plan). Due to non-implementation of disputed SIU Report of CGHS allopathic 
dispensaries the new proposals of CGHS were held up and not sanctioned by Ministry of 
Finance. Further, the approval for the 100 bedded hospital at Hyderabad which was included 
in the allocation for 1995-96 could not be obtained. Due to these reasons, the provision 
made for this purpose had to be surrendered/diverted for . other programmes, the 
Department added. The Committee is constrained to note that the Department could not 
• pursue the revision of SIU Report with Ministry of Finance. Revision of SIU Report is 
urgently needed for creation of new posts and opening of new CGHS dispensaries. Presently 
only a few cities in the country are covered and the Committee desires that all major cities 
should be covered at the earliest. Moreover, with the expansion of the metro cities, the 
coverage is not even and many pockets in these cities are not covered. Therefore, more 
dispensaries are required to be opened even in the cities where CGHS coverage is already 
there. For this. the Department would require additional funds. It is, therefore, necessary . 
that the Department should pursue the matter vigorously with the Ministry of Finance for 
the revision of SIU Report so that the allocation could be enhanced at the RE stage. The 
Committee has noted that the sanctioned strength of.C.G.H.S. ~s 7318 out of which 6822 are 
in position and 495 vacant posts are there. Posts abolished which are required to be revived 
are 166 and the requirement of staff for proposed expansion in 1996-97 is 130. The 
Department proposes to set-up five Allopathic new dispensaries and five new Homoepathic 
dispensaries, and the financial requirement for the expansion is Rs. 86 lakh per annum. The 
additional funds required for the existing dispensaries is Rs. 60 lakhs. The Planning 
Commission may consider meeting the additional ·requirements. The Committee, however, 
has examined the functioning of CGHS and submitted a separate detailed report on the 
functioning of CGHS (A Summary of recommendations is enclosed-Annexure I). Therefore, 
the Committee would not like to discuss the issues relating to CGHS at length :.il this stage. 
., 

I 
'. \ 
~;·-.:o----..- · · -
ITI. HOSPITALS AND [JISi-ENSA.Ri:ES 
3.1. Even though under the head 'Hospitals and Dispe;;.sa;ie,s' , li : :;~· e is <: substR'!tia; 
increa se in the overall allocation, there is no marked incre;>se in the allocarion in respect of 
the individual hospitals excepting Kalawa ti Saran Children Hospital , New DeE1i. E>:en i;1 the 
case of Kalaw ati Saran Children 's Hospita l, New Delhi, the increa se is because of the 
external aid being received through a Japanese project called 'JICA' . Ail the Central 
Government hospital s are suffering from resource crunch which ultimately leads to appalling . 
conaitions, sub-standard services, overcrowding, etc. There are no sophisticated and latest 
equipments in almost all the hospitals and staff scarcity and lack of basic amenities are a· 
r .. ~ gular feature in all the hospitals. It is high time the Government should consider the 
importance of health sector in order to achieve the goal of 'Health For All' by 2000 A.D. 
Unless sufficient funds are made available to the health sector during the Ninth Plan period , 
this goal, the Committee apprehends, would remain a distant dream. 
3.2. Kalawati Saran Children Hospital has been allocated Rs. 41.6 crores during the 
current year as against Rs. 6.71 at RE stage last year. Explaining this hike in the allocation 
the Secretary informed the Committee that a project for improvement of Kalawati Saran 
Children Hospital, New Delhi at a total cost of Rs. 45.5 crores has been approved. This 
project is assisted by the Japan International Corporation Agency (JICA). However, an 
allocation of Rs. 25 crores only has been made out of which Rs. 20 crores is meant for the . 
JiCA project. As per MoU, this project is to be completed by March, 1997. The Secretary 
has, therefore, stated that it would be necessary for the Government to release the 
committed amount within this year. 
3.3. The Committee is constrained to note that the Finance Ministry has not given due 
consideration to the external aids being received by the Government of India from foreign 
agencies. The foreign commitments have to be honoured by all me:.ans and full budgetary 
allocations should be made as per the commitments made to foreign agencies. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Finance should meet the 
full commitments for the externally-aided project at the ·Rev ised Estimate stage without fail. 
3.4. The Committee has already examined the functioning of the Central Governm .ent 
Hospitals at great length and has given a very comprehensive report (31st report) on various 
facets of working of the hospitals. (Summary of recommendations is enclosed-Annexure-H). 
The Committee will not be, ·therefore, discussing the issues pertaining to the functioning of 
hospitals at length at this stage. 
IV. MEDICAL, EDUCATION, TRAINING AND RESEARCH 
4.1. Last year, a total of Rs. 310.81 crores was allocated under this head at the RE 
stage as against Rs. 328.38 crores during the current year. Institutions such as AIIMS, Lady 
Hardinge Medical College and Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, 
Chandigarh fall under this category. These institutions, being the premier research 
organisations in the health sector also provide medical facilities to the patients, and "they 
appropriately need fairly higher allocations. The Secretary, during the course of his evidence 
before the Committee also informed that an additional allocation of Rs. 52.50 crores is 
required for establishment and development of Cardio-Thoracic and Neuro-Sciences Centre 
at the AIIMS, New Delhi. The Committe .e has examined these institutions threadbare and 
made detailed recommendations after making visits to the institutions and ·submitted a 
detailed :feport (31st report) on the functioning of Central Government Hospitals . The 
Committee , therefore, at this stage would only recommend that the research institutions be 
!itt' 
·::§ 
.·. ' 
I 
, · 

provided the requi::ed grants necessary to carry out their research actiVIties which is 
important keeping in view the growing comple xities of emerging new diseases confr onted by 
the health sector. The AIIMS, New Delhi may, therefore, be provided the additional 
allocation of Rs. 52.5 crores for the purpose mentioned above. Explaining the steps being 
taken to cope ·with th ~: patient rush in the PGI. Chandigarh, the Secretary stated that a 
separate OPD block is coming up at a cost of nearly 16.20 crores and is expected to be 
completed by the middle of 1997. The Committee desires that the OPD block should be 
completed as per the schedule. 
4.2. There is no marked increase in the allocations made to Indian Council of Medical 
Research, i.e. Rs. 54 crores during the current year as against Rs. 51 crores at RE stage last 
year. ICMR is the premier research institution in the health sector and it needs adequate 
strength and financial support. The Government may consider providing higher allocations 
to the Council. The Committee also reiterates its recommendation made last year that 
proper monitoring machinery may be made to supervise the functioning of growing number 
of private medical colleges. 
4.3. Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute: Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute (VPCI), Delhi 
is an institute financed by grant-in-aid from the Department of Health although its 
management is under the control of Delhi University. The Committee has noted with regret 
a substantial downfall in the research activities and patient care in ·the Institute . The Institute 
is in a very bad shape and it needs to be revived. The Committee had examined the matter 
last year and recommended that the Department should prepare a comprehensi"e plan for 
modernising the Institute laboratories and to restore its past glory. The Secretary, 
Department of Health, informed the Committee that steps have been initiated for the revival 
of indoor facilities and for optimum utilisation of the existing resources and the possibilities 
are being explored for levying appropriate charges on various services to generate resources. 
4.4. The Committee is of the view that even though the Department of Health provides 
the financial resources it has no effective control over its administration. The Department 
have stated that the issue of dmd control over the Institute was taken up with the 
Department of Eclucation. The Committee, recommePds that the m:1 tter should be settled at 
the earliest and the Department cf Health should take control of tr..: Institute immediately. 
4.5. Mahatma Gandhi Institute of .Medical Sciences, Sevagram, Wardha: The Mahatma 
Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences was established with the laudable objective of providing 
medical education to cater to the needs of rural population and to train doctors with 
community-oriented health care approach. The Institute is managed by the Kasturb.a Health 
Society. The Government of India extends financial assistance as grants-in-aid to the 
Institute to meet 50% of its recurring expenditure. The Government of Maharashtra bears 
25% of the recurring expenditure. However, the Committee is constrained to note that the 
outlay for the Institute has been reduced to 3.50 crores during the current year as agamst an 
allocation of Rs. 4.00 crores made last year. The increase in the annual release of grants 
made over the years was mainly to meet expenditure on salaries etc. During 1995-96, higher 
allocation was made to cover the shortfall of earlier financial years on account of increased 
pay and allowances. A demand of Rs. 420 lakhs was made by the Institute and the 
Department allocated Rs. 3.50 crores for B.E. 1996-97. Release of funds over and above the 
Budget provisions would be considered at the RE stage, the Department stated. The 
Institute has been doing an excellent job in th~ field of medical education to cater to the 
needs of rural people. It is the first and only medical college located in the r:..:rai surrounding 
.1nd exposes the students to the health problems of the rural .areas. It is th ~ only hospital 
' · 
!' 
I . 

7 
started by Gandhiji, fat her of the Natio n, with excellent diagnostic and curati ve faciliti es and 
adeq uate base for undergradua te and PG training. Any red uction in the budge tary alloca tion 
of this noble Institute would adversely disturb the on-going activities of the Insti tute. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the activities of the Institute shou ld be 
further expanded and strengthened and the allocation to this Institute may be substantially 
enhanced at the Revised Estimate stage. 
4.6. Cancer Research: It is distressing to note that about 7 Jakh new cases of cancer 
occur in the country every year out of which 2/3rd cases are in advance and incurable stage 
at the time of diagnosis. It has been estimated that by the year 2026, cancer deaths in India 
-w~ll increase nearly threefold. Facilities for diagnosis/treatment that exist in the country are 
grossly inadequate. There are 11 regional cancer centres which cover less that 10% of the 
population. The Deptt. informed the Committee that there is an urgent need to upgrade the 
facilities and training programmes in many of these centres. 
4.7. The allocation made for the programme on plan-side for the current year is Rs. 18 
crores as against the actual requirement of Rs. 20 crores. In view of the grave situation 
obtainin 'g in the country in this regard, the Committee strongly recommends that the 
required amount may be made available for the programme at the RE stage. The 
Committ~e also recommends that the coverage under the programme may be increased and 
steps may be taken to upgrade the facilities at the cancer centres. 
V. NATIONAL HEALTH PROGRAMMES 
(i) National Malaria Eradication Programme 
5.1. This programme was originally launched in 1958 with the objective of eradicating 
the disease from the country. After the initial success in controlling the disease and bringing 
down its incidence from 75 million during pre-eradication to 0.~ million by 1965, the 
programme received a setback thereafter and due to various reasons, malaria resurged and 
reached an all-time high of 6.4 million cases in 1976 and now it has been hovering around 2 
million cases every year. Local resurgence of malaria also. took place in Rajasthan, Manipur 
and Nagaland in 1994 and in Assam, Maharashtra in 1995. 
5.2 The following statement shows the achievements in containing the malaria situation 
in the country: 
Year 
1991 
1992 
1993 
1994 
1995 
Malaria cases 
(in million) 
2.21 
2.23 
2.20 
2.51 
2.80 
P. falsiparum cases 
(in million) 
0.92 
0.88 
0.85 
0.99 
1.09 
Dea ths 
421 
422 
354 
1122 
1061 
5.3. From the above statement, it may be seen that the malaria cases have not come 
down below 2 milllion during the last f9ur years. 
5.4. The Committee is given to understand that the continued resurgence of malaria is 
primarily due to delayed spray operations coupled with insecticides resistance in vectors and 
chloroquine resistance in parasite. The Department also informed the Committee that the 
... ·:~.-
: ~· . . ·. -. ·' 

u 
financial C0 r!tr ~l b::H!-! at the C-::~::-e ~::~: li; ik. s:~ie~ nave oeen c:ea:ing tuldle~ ;;, 
?:JrCl::[tSe u:c; ~t:;)ply of adcqu ~rt:e quumi :;es of insec ticides iike Delt amet hrine to w hich the 
mos q~itoes are still sensitive and also allernativ e drugs in p.f. resistance cases. J.'he 
Co:n mittee is of the v i~ w ti1at \Vith these problems afOic[ing the programme. the country 
will never be able to co ntrol malariu, not to speak of erildication unless redical steps are 
taken. 
5.5. The Committee feels that there is no proper monitoring of the implementation of 
the programme. The root cause of malaria is the diat and unhygienic conditions prevailing 
all around in pu blic life. Unless clean and hygienic conditions are crea ted, the disease 
cannot be eradica ted as the present steps are not targeted to attack this· root cause. 
Sufficient importance should, therefore, be given for providing clean and hygienic 
surroundings. 
5.6. A continued monitoring should be done for timely spraying of insecticides to 
which the mosquitoes have not become immune, at regular intervals. A way out should be 
found out to remove the hurdles that are coming in the implementation of this programme 
both by the Centre and the States . There is a strong felt need for a perspective plan to 
control and eradicate the disease and financial constraints should not be allowed to create 
hurdles in the implementation of the programme of this magnitude. The allocations made 
for the programme are as under:-
1994-95 
1995-96 
1996-97 
BE 91.90 crores 
BE 121.10 crores 
BE 137.50 crores 
RE 92.00 crores 
RE 130.81 crores 
5. 7. The Committee recommends that in case higher allocation is required for the 
programme, the same may be provided at the RE stage. The Secretary , Health has also 
informed the Committee that a project for control of malaria in the trib:1l areas with 100% 
assistance from World Bank and other exter.wl donor agencie s has been under 
formulation. This propos al has been pending for quite some time. The Secretary , Health 
has also informed the Committee that a project for control of Malaria , particularly in the 
tribal areas with assistance from World Bank and other external Donor Agencies has been 
under formulation. The project, would be based on community involvement and there 
would be greater emphasis on the use of bio-cnvironment friendly strutegies lik~ 
larvivorous fish medicated badnets, bio-cides etc. Beneficiary and social assessment studies 
have already been completed in various parts of the country, the Secretary added. The 
proposal has been pending since , 1995. An Appriasal Mission will be coming to India in 
January, 1996-97 and before that environmental assessment project implementation Plan 
and commitment from State Governments to sustain State level costs after the Projects 
have been co,mpleted in 2002. are required to be completed. The Committ ee is constrained 
to note that it is taking a long time for finalising the project. In view of the continued 
resurgence in Various Parts of the country, the Committee strongly feels that at least by 
December, all the requirements should be comp leted to enable the Appraisa l Mission of 
the World Bank to finalise the Project. 
5.8. The Government's efforts to control Malaria should also be supplemented by the 
Indian Systems of Medicines specially in the context of the situation prevailing in the 
Tribal Areas. Particularly Ayush-64, an Ayurve 'dic medicine has been pro ved ver y effective 
in containing Malaria and it should be widely used and also populari sed . This is all the 
more necessary as mosquitoes have become immune to DDT and other Insecticides and 
.... : .... .,. ........ ...,. ~· · :· ···-:--. -­' . • 
I I · 
'I 
I 
l l' 
! 
~·. 
(: 
; 
.. ,_ 
:f-
:'·' 

9 
other drugs such as coloroquine, etc. The Secretary informed the Committee that the 
effectiveness of Ayush-64 is being tested in the laboratories. The Committee, however, desires 
that such a testing should be done by a panel of experts drawn from both Allopathic and 
Ayurvedic systems of medicine to ensure objectivity. 
(ii) National Leprosy Eradication Programme 
5.9. This programme is implemented with the aim to achieve elimination of leprosy by the 
year 2000 A.D. The Government of India have taken World Bank assistance of Rs. 302 crores 
for ensuring early detection and free Multi-Drug Therapy (MDT) services to all leprosy cases. 
The progress of the programme, the Committee was given to understand, has been remarkable. 
The prevalence of leprosy has been reduced from the level of 4 million estimated cases in 1981 
to 0.54 million on record by March, 1996. The prevalence rate of leprosy was 57 per 10,000 in 
1981 which has since been reduced to 5.8 per 10,000 population by now. A total of 6.53 million 
patients have been cured with MDT till March, 1996. The implementation of the programme, 
however, appears to be lacking the desired determination and seriousness as the funds allocated 
for the programme have not been utilized fully. For example, during 1995-96,· out of the total 
allqcation of Rs. 30 crores, only Rs. 64.8 crores could be utilized. Again during the current year, 
Rs. 74 crores only have been allocated. Explaning about the under utilisation of funds, the 
Department have stated that this was mainly due to non-finalisation of agreement for supply of 
additiof\al drugs and free supply drugs received from W.H.O. The M.D.T. Scheme was 
sanctioned in about 200 Districts, towards the end of the financial year 1994-95 and the Districts 
took time in establishing the infrastructure and recruiting staff. The Committee recommends 
that the programme should be implemented with added seriousness and be extended in all parts 
of the country. Funds allocated should be utilized fully._ There is also a need for intensified 
health education and public awareness compaigns to remove the social stigma attached with the 
disease. The Department, should take necessary steps in this direction. 
(iii) National TB Control Programme 
5.10. T.B. continues to be a major health problem 'in the country. It affects mainly people 
in their most productive years of life and is commonly ~ssociated with poverty, overcrowding 
and malnutrition. Lack of education, environmental pollution and poor sanitation compound 
the problem. The Committee is also constrained to note that every year 2 to 2.5 million new TB 
cases occur in the country and about 5 lakh people die due to the disease. Around 60 per cent of 
AIDS cases reported in the country, have evidence of active Tuberculosis. Inspite of this 
seriousness and magnitude of the disease, the Committee is disturbed to note that the target 
achievements of the programme is · not satisfactory which is evident from the following 
statement:-
New Cases 
Sputum Exam. 
1992-93 1993-94 1994-95 
Target Achievement Target Achievement .Targe. Achievement 
17.50 
33.96 
15.39 
27.53 
18.00 
34.00 
11.80 
22.41 
19.00 
34.00 
12.49 
22.41 
5.11. From the above statement, it may be seen that the achievements are no where near 
the targets. The Committee, therefore, feels that the_programme lacks the seriousn~ss in its 
implementation. It should be strengthened and impl~mented effectively in all parts of the 
country as TB is prevalent in each and every corner of the country. Needless to mention that the 
programme needs to be constantly monitored to achieve the desired results. 
... 
.• ;. 
'·· 

. . ~ 
-' 
. I 
i 
··.' ' -! 
10 
5.12. The Commi rtee has also b een given to unde rstand that a revised strategy for 
implementation of TB Co ntro l Programme has been formulat ed in consultation with World 
Health Organisution and with assistance from World Bank. The Secretary also informed the 
Committee that the progr amme envisages covering 102 districts in different phases during 
three years which covers different States and Union Territories. 
5.13. The Committee, however, does not agree with the contention of the Ministry that 
if th~ whole country is covered with the revised st!ategy, it would take 14 years to reduce 
the disease load to half its present level. The Committee feels that the strategy should be 
extended to the entire country and WHO and Woild Bank should be accordingly impressed 
upon for suitable financial assistance. If the programme is implemented with the seriousness 
and determination it deserves it should not take so long to reduce the disease to half its 
present leveL What is required is a well thought out strategy perspective plan to be 
formulated. There is also a need for increasing awareness among the people. Information, 
Education and Communication activities under this programme also need to be further 
strengthened. 
5.14. The Committee ·has also been · given to understand that drug resistance is" an 
emerging problem of the disease. Another major factor has been poor patient compliance, 
he added . The Committee is given to understand that in order to reduce the problem of 
drug resistance, some new strategies are being envisaged in the revised programme. The 
Commit _tee desires that these strategies should be implemented forthwith without any delay. 
(iv) National AIDS Control Programme 
5.15. The Committee is perturbed to note that India has a significant potential for the 
transmission and spread of HIV infection which causes AIDS. As per World Health 
Organisation, India contributes more than one half of the total HIV positives in the South 
East Asia region. As on June 1996, a total number of 2,621 AIDS cases have been reported. 
However, the number of AIDS cases reported represent only a small fraction of the actual 
cases. The surveillance report reveals that of the 2.8 million persons screened up to June 
1996, 23147 were found to be HIV positive. Inspite o( the seriousness of the disease and its 
wide repercussions and dimensions , the Committee observes that the funds allocated for the 
programme are not being utilized fully. The following statement shows the allocation made 
and actual expenditure:-
1992-93 
1993-94 
1995-96 
BE 1992-93 
RE 1992-93 
Actual Expdr. 
BE 1993.-94 
RE 1993-94 
Actual Expdr . 
BE 1995-96 
RE 1995-96 
Actual Expdr. 
70.00 
70.00 
29.71 
73.00 
73.00 
32.90 
80.00 
70.00 
53.40 
5.16. The main reasons explained by the Department for the under·utilisation of the 
funds under the AIDS Control Programmes are that the State Governments have been slow 
in establishing infrastructure. The main emphasi 's in the initial stages was on establishing 
machinery and it had not absorbed funds fully. Commercial sex workers and such other high 
risk groups are reluctant to come-forward; procedural delay in procuring the equipment is 

J 
! 
P-
\ 
I r 
f 
:t:=t~u~:;.:r::~:7~=;~;~·;:·: 
·~· .··. ... . ' . · -~ . 
11 
also a reason for this malady, the Department added. The Committee, however, feels that 
these reasons can be attributed to one year or two years but, if the funds are not being fully 
utilised every year, then there must be something wrong somewhere, which must be looked 
into. The Committee understands that most of the alloca~ion made for this programme is 
from the foreign aid component. In fact, out of the total allocation of Rs. 141 crores made 
for the current year, Rs. 140 crores is the foreign aid component. The Committee fails to 
understand under utilisation of funds in such an important programme particularly when it 
has a foreign component. It need hardly to be mentioned that the Department should take 
full advantage of external aids and sufficient funds be earmarked to absorb the entire 
assistance received from external agencies. The current year's allocation is almost double the 
last year's allocation . Therefore, all-out efforts should be made to utilise the funds fully. 
5.17. The Secretary also informed the Committee that in pursuance of the Supreme 
Court judgment, national and State blood transfusion councils have been established for 
ensuring elimination of professional Blood Donors, encouraging voluntary blood donation 
and to ensure that the mandatory requirement of licence for Blood Banks is implemented at 
the earliest. The Committee also desires that there should be strict surveillance and 
monitoring on the activities of the district level Blood Banks and Blood Transfusion Centre~. 
The Committee is also constrained to note that the HIV growth rate among commercial sex 
workers in Mumbai is 1% to 51% during the last five years. The Committee is of the firm 
view that the Red Light areas in the important cities are the major places from where AIDS 
desease is transmitted and spread. Explaining the steps taken in this regard, the Department 
stated that Sonagachi Project, Calcutta; Kamathapura Project, Bombay; and Biana Project, 
Goa, are the important project in Red Light areas being approved by National AIDS 
Control Organisation. The Committee desires that such projects should be taken up for all 
the major cities and towns in the country. 
5.18. The Committee also feels that there are very little efforts made to increase 
awareness among the people about the cause of occurrence and prevention of this d.isease. 
In fact, it is negligible in rural, backward and tribal areas. Therefore, the Committee feels, 
that a separate strategy should be evolved for strengthening the awareness programme 
highlighting the causes and affects of thi" disease. Further, the surveillance data is collected 
through 52 sentinel sites.The Committee, however, feels that this survey is not very effectiv~ 
and foolproof. The Committee desires that the data collection should be strengthened and 
made accurate. The Committee was particularly perturbed to note that the Department of 
Health does not have any reliable and authentic datas about the number of people affected 
or suffering from this dreaded disease particularly in Metro towns like Calcutta, Bombay, 
Delhi and Madras, etc. where there is heavy concentration of sex workers. The Committee 
desires that a survey should be got conducted through an impartial and reliable agency to 
have an idea about the exact magnitude of the problem in all the Metro towns beginning 
with Calcutta, Bombay and Delhi. 
(v) National Mental Health Programme 
5.19. The Committee is constrained to note that the National Mental Health Programme 
(NMHP) could not make much headway due to delay in creation of proper infrastructure at 
Central and State levels. The Secretary, while accepting this fact, explained that in order to 
review and evolve a comprehensive plan of action, a National Mental Bealth Workshop was 
organised in Bangalore in- February, 1996 in which the State Health Administrators and 
mental health professionals also participated. In the said workshop, a blue print for a 
:::: . . 
·"·.-

··l _, 
J :1 ;-:1 ,_,, 
·' 
12 
community based District Mental Health Programme was finalised. In the current year 
(1996-97), an allocation of Rs. 100 lakhs is available under NMHP. It has been decided to 
implement · the District Mental Health Programme on a pilot basis in the various States 
subject to limitations of funds, he added. The Commj~tee, however, desires that the 
programme should be implemented in all the districts ·during the 9th Plan period and 
allocatic:ms may accordingly be raised. 
' <j) 
5.20. The Committee is constrained to note that many of the mental hospitals and 
institutions are starved of funds. The hospitals are in a pitiable condition. Some of the 
hospitals have been released funds only on the intervention of the. Supreme Court. The . 
Committee, ther~fore, recommends that hereafter, these institutions should not be allowed 
to starve for funds. Suffici<;nt funds should be allocated and they should be released in time. 
5.21. The Committee is happy to note that the Mansik A,rogyashalas at Ranchi, Gwalior 
and Agra have been conferred the status of autonomous bodies. Conferring autonomous 
status does, however, not serve the purpose, the Committee feels, unless sufficient funds are 
provided for their development' and their activities are regularly monitored. The Committee 
has repeatedly observed that most of the programmes I schemes are suffering in the absence ­
of proper monitoring mechanism both by the Central and State Government. We need to 
strengthen our monitoring system to ensure effective implementation of these programme. 
5.22. National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences, Bangalore, is a premier 
organisation engaged in conducting research in mental health and neuro-sciences. The 
allocation to institute on Plan side has been reduced to Rs. 4.50 crores as against Rs 5.50 
crores in R:E; last year. The institute needs to be strengthened. It is the only Institute of its 
kind in the country. It is unfortunate that the Institute is not being given proper attention. 
The allocations may be suitably enhanced at the RE stage so that on-going activities don't 
suffer. 
5.23. The Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi has been allocated an outlay of Rs. 
5.50 crores for 1996-97 as against Rs. 4.87 crores allocated last year at the R.E. stage. Due 
to the poor conditions prevailing in the institute, the Committee recommended last year for 
a review of the functioning of the institute. Not much headway has been done in this regard. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation. 
5.24. It has also been brought to. the notice of the Committee that the Mental Hospital, 
Dharwad and Thane are in a very bad shape. They are very old hospitals requiring major 
repairs and are in very bad shape. The Committee recommends that the Depar~ment should 
look into the matter and provide necessary grant-in-aid immediately. 
(vi) Kala Azar Control Programme 
5.25. The outlay for this programme has been reduced from Rs. 20 crores'in B.E. 1995-
96 to Rs. 13.50 crores in the R.E. 1995-96 and further to Rs. 10 crores during 1996-97. 
Clarifying the reduction in the outlay, it was stated that Bihar Government did not send any 
demand for providing DDT during 1995-96 and , therefore, the provision was reduced to Rs. 
13.50 crores in R.E. for 1995-96 from Rs. 20 crores in BE. Howe ver, this amount also could 
not be utilised by Bihar and West Bengal. I:Ience, Rs. 10 crores have been allocated in 
current year, the Department, added. 
· ... : .. ·· .. 
. . ·. ~ . 
o4' • • 
. . . 
.. · :.-. .·. ·· .. 
l 
l 

.. ::-: __ :::;f 
·.: <"1 . ' 
-: .... ~ t 
:.,:·~ .! 
.r;.:···i 
·i.-'-.'! 
:f(~·i ': f 
;.- :.~;·~ 
:'~:. :1: 
: :•.; 
t'l,:~.:~ 
13 
5.26. Kala Azar has not been controlled so far. The cases and deaths during last five 
yea,rs are as under: 
Year :ases Deaths 
1991 61670 838 
1992 77102 1419 
1993 45459 710 
1994 25531 382 
(Prov.) 
1995 7595 71* 
*(Upto May) 
5.27. It is surprising to note that in spite of continued cases and deaths taking place, the 
State Governments of Bihar and West Bengal where this disease is prevalent could not 
utilise the funds last year. The Committee is constrained to note that in spite of the funds 
being provided by the Centre, the States are not serious about impletl)enting the 
programme. This is predsely so due to lack of monitoring both by the Central and State 
Governments. Unless we improve our monitoring mechanism, it will not be possible to make 
much headway howsoever be the budgetary allocations. The Committee, therefore, desires 
· that the Department should impress upon the States to take the programme seriously 
particularly in view of the prevailing situation and the alarming rate of deaths caused. 
5.28. The Committee again recommends that there should be regular and proper 
monitoring of the implementation of the programme and the Department should take up the 
matter with the States for .its effective implementation. 
(vii) National Iodine Deficiency Disorder Programme 
5.29. A population of 54.4 million is estimated to be suffering from endemic goitre and 
ubout 8.8 million people are having mental I motor han·dicaps. The Committee is shocked to 
learn that according · to a survey conducted, not even a single State/Union Territory is free 
from the problem of iodine deficiency disorders. 
5.30. The Secretary informed the Committee that the production of iodated salt in our 
country is about 40 lakh tonnes per annum as against the annual requirement of 50 lakh 
tonnes per annum. The Secretary further informed that the policy of manufacturing iodated 
salt has been liberalised to private sector. 
5.31. The Committee is of the view that an extensive survey in all the districts including 
those where it has not been done so far, should be conducted to assess the exact magnitude 
· of the problem. 
5.32. The Committee is constrained to note that in about 8 States 1 UTs, the use of 
non-iodated salt · has not been banned as yet. The Department should impress upon all the 
States about the necessity of banning the sale of non -iodated salt. 
5.33. The IDD monitoring laboratories should be set up in all the States/ UTs. The 
Committee is of the view that a large number of people in rural, backward and tribal areas 
are still not aware of the use of iodated salt. There is, therefore, an urgent necessity of 
stepping up publicit:x; campaign to disseminate information on iodine deficiency disorders and 
benefits of the use of iodated salt. 
5.34. The Committee is also constrained to note that even though the sale of uniodated 
:·--: ·~~.~-~fr_:_:-_; ::·v~ ~~~?~~:~ ~; =~:::.:=-;~ .. · -. 
··.·· .· 
.· :.:: .~ .. :: :· :.· .. 
··:· ... ::· ::·:.::: . :-·. :.::- · = :::::.§<:z~:_Ff~?f?.'~:~::~=J.~~~~~)~ = 
.·... ... . ·:· .• ... : . . · 
·. · .. ::;. 
·::/'\_· .·· ;:' .... 
··.,: : · 

:.··. 
~~ 
.·.· 
14 
salt has been banned in Delhi, yet it is freely available for consumption there. According to 
a study reportedly conducted by the Centre for Community Medicine, one of the possible 
reasons as to why it is still available may be that Delhi Government had ba'nned only 
uniodated salt for human consumption and not salt meant ~or animal consumption. Perhaps 
due to this loophole in the legislation , H1e uniodated salt is still available in Delhi. This 
problem may also be in existence in other States as well. The Committee, therefore, desires 
that the Department should instruct all the States/Union Territories to ban the sale of 
uniodated salt meant for both human as well as animal consumptions. 
(viii) Prevention of Deafness · and Hearing Impairment Programme 
5.35. Deafness costs the nation huge amount in terms of capital wastage besides loss of 
production of an equal amount. It is, further, worsened by the continued social dependance 
of the deaf on the community. When the Secretary was asked to explain about the plans 
being prepared for prevention of deafness, he stated that there is a plan to launch a pilot 
project for treatment, research and prevention of deafness and hearing..Jmpairment diseases 
and a sum of Rs. 0.20 crores has been provided during 1996-97. The Committee desires that 
the pilot project should be finalised at the earliest so that it may start implementation during 
the current year itself. 
(ix) National Programme for Control of Blindness 
5.36. Under this programme, steps are taken to provide immediate relief to the needy 
by eye camp approach. In India as per the national survey results, it is estimated that there 
are more than 12 million blind persons. This is a programme suffering from both under­
utilisation of funds and non-achievement of targets. During the last 4 years, the funds 
allocated were never spent fully. During the year 1994-95, Rs. 72 crores of rupees were 
provided in the Budget Estimates which was reduced to 63 crores of rupees in the RE and 
ultimately Rs. 54.84 crores were spent. As regards the achieveme·nt of targets is concerned, 
the following statement shows that during the last 4 years, achievements had never reached 
the target: 
(Cases . in lakhs) 
Year Targets Achievements 
1992-93 20.00 16.05 
1993-94 24.30 10.10 
1994-95 24050 021.56 
1995-96 25.50 24.66 
~'•> 5.37 . The Committee, therefore, desires that necessary steps should be taken to ensure 
·. the full utilisation of the funds. Emphasis should also be laid on achieviPg the targets set. 
VI. PREVENTION OF FOOD ADULTERATION 
6. The Committee is constrained to note that very precious little has been done to check 
food adulteration in the country. There is rampant corruption all around and people 
involved in food adulteration, get away by greasing the palms of the officials, thereby 
playing with the lives of innocent people. Theroe are vested inte~ests which are flourishing 
unchecked. There is no check and monitoring by the Government. The outlay for the 
programme has been reduced to Rs. 1.80 crores in 1996-97 from Rs. 1.99 crores in BE 1995-
96. The Committee feels that this 
0 
amount is· grossly inadequate 0 The 
'\ o· 
¥ 
! : 

·' 
\ ... 
15 
Committee was very much perturbed over the sad state of affairs prevailing in the society 
when we hear innocent people dying in large number due to malnutrition and food 
adulteration for petty pecuniary gains. We cannot afford to sit idle and allow the things to 
go on for long. The need of the hour is to check the menace prevailing in the society with a 
firm hand. Constraints of funds cannot be allowed to come in the way of effective 
implementation of such an important programme. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that the Department should launch a very intensive and vigorous drive to curb 
the menace of food adulteration which has found deep roots in the society. Stern action may 
also be taken against the officials found in connivance and league with the hoarders, black­
marketeers and food adulterators. The Committee again reiterates its earlier 
recommendation for a regular and constant monitoring of the implementation of this 
programme in an effective manner. The Department should prepare a comprehensive plan 
to check and eliminate food adulteration from the society. 
VII. NURSING SERVICES 
7. The Committee is of the view that the nursing services need to be strengthened 
further. There is a need for setting up more nursing schools and colleges particularly in rural 
and trib"l areas. · The Secretary during his oral evidence informed the Committee that in 
order to expand the nursing services and nursing education qualitatively and quantitatively in 
the country, State Governments were requested to send proposals. The Committee is, 
however, constrained to note that there is no encouraging response from the States. The 
Secretary has also informed the Committee that in view of lukewarm response from the 
States, a concept proposal has been prepared by the Nursing experts for upgradation of 
nursing services in qualitative and quantitative terms. The requisite data for preparing 
projects are being collected and the proposal will be crystalised in about 2-3 months time, 
the Committee was informed . The Committee desires that this proposal should be finalised 
at the earliest and it's implementation should be started during the current financial year 
itself. ' . • 
VIII. AVAILABILITY OF SPURIOUS DRUGS 
8. The Committee is disturbed to note that spurious drugs are freely available in the 
market without any check and monitoring. This has been posing a very serious problem 
resulting in grave health hazard and consequent deaths of innocent persons. The problem of 
manufacture and sale of spurious and fake drugs in man-made and it has to be curbed with a 
firm hand. The Committee is of the firm view that the matter needs to be examined at great 
length. We can't afford to be silent spectator to innocent lives being taken away by anti­
social elements fndulging in ~h e sale of spurious drugs. A comprehensive plan, the 
Committee recommends, should be prepared to check the menace of manufacture, sale and 
supply of spurious and fake drugs. There should be provision for stringent punishments 
against the persons found responsible for spurious drugs. At a time when there are already 
many diseases like AIDS, Malaria, Cancer, etc. afflicting the nation, the country cannot 
afford to have another man-made problem like the one of spurious drugs . The Committee 
also recommends that a legislation should be made to provide for rigorous punishment to 
those who indulge in manufacture, sale and supply of spurious and fake drugs. 
IX. PRIMARY HEALTH CENTRES 
9.1. The functioning of Primary Health Centres in the rural areas is the cause of serious 
concern for the C>mmittee. As per the norms fixed by the Planning Commission, a Primary 
Health Centre would cater to about 30,000 population. The Primary Health Centres are in 
deplorable condition. There are no doctors not to talk of the other paramedical staff. The 
. 
' -. 
;~o: ~·::~ 
I! 
~~~l§:i 
~}~~!­
~~J 
~~i:1:i;! 
I.·, 
I· :·.·. 
f,:;·~;.:: 
! : .:-' 
l;~);s~ 
i ::~~ ~~ 
! .... ~~<.' 
·.r.o· - .... ~ 
:~J·:··~ ~~ ." 
I .. . 
·" ··· . 
. ~-:~.:_: r. ~ 
.. _. - :,::;i··· ·;:~:.Y.;J:;:<~J~.-::;·.-~- :f-, : :~.-. :.: . :~ ... ~~: . :· ·:: ·~:~·-'. r::.·~-~t:?~-t:~;; :;~,} 
.. 

16 
Committee was given to understand that out of 21,802 PHCs, 1,136 PHCs are without 
doctors. Even where the doctors have been posted, they are not regular and punctual in 
attending to their duties. They do not stay in the villages and there is no provision for their 
stay at these centres. Quite often, doctors posted in the Primary Health Centres are 
reluctant to join their duties and manage to get their postings changed by using powerful 
influences. The Committee feels that there should be exemplary punishment for such cases. 
On the other hand, there are doctors who .have been languishing in PHCs for years together 
in the absence of any rotational transfer policy. There is no transfer policy worth the name 
for the doctors in the Primary Health Centres. 
9.2. Often it is observed that there are no medicines avai"Jable in the Primary Health 
Centres. Even where the medicines are available, they are of either sub-standard quality or 
date expired. In some of the Primary Health Centres, doctors are reported to be in league 
with the private pathologists and recommend for unwarranted investigations so as to mint 
money. Funds available for the Primary Health Centres are very meagre. 
9.3. As per the norms followed, a Primary Health Centre should have 15 staff members 
including one Medical officer, one Pharmasist etc. The Committee is, however, constrained 
to note that about 16 per cent of the Primary Health Centres do not have Doctors. Out of 
this, the condition is wo~e in U.P., Bihar, M.P., Rajasthan, Orissa and Assam. In these 
States, in more that 30 per cent P.H.Cs Doctors are not available. The Committee has also 
noted that a proposal is under-consideration to utilise the services of private Doctors through 
their visits to the Cent~es twice or thrice a week. This is already in implementation in 
Andhra Pradesh. The Committee considers this a good proposal and the Department should 
ex;>lore the possibility of implementing it throughout the country. This cannot be a solution 
always and at every place. Ultimate goal should be that all the staff particularly, doctors, 
should be in position in all P.H.Cs. On being asked, the Secretary, Health informed the 
Committee that the appointments and posting .of doctors at Primary Health Centres and 
Community Health Centres are made by the State Governments , The Central Government 
has been impressing upon the State Governments to ensur.e that all PHCs and CSCs have 
doctors and other staff in position. In fact, the Central Council for Health and Family 
Welfare in a meeting held on 11-1.3 October, 1995 had passed the following resoultion: 
"The Council notes with great concern this severe scarcity of doctors in rural areas and 
recommends that rural posting for a specific period be made compulsory and also a pre­
requisite before admission to postgraduate courses." 
9.4. The Committee entirely agrees with the recommendation made by the Council and 
recommend that the rural pos'ting for all the doctors for a limited period of 3 to 5 years be 
made mandatory and it should also be made a pre-requisite qualification for admission to the 
postgraduate courses. 
9.5. The Committee feels that the functioning of the Primary Health Centre needs to be 
thoroughly reviewed and the malpractices prevailing these centres should be removed 
urgently. Sufficient funds should be made available for efficient functioning of these centres. 
There should be regular and constant inspections by the senior doctors so as to ensure their 
smooth and efficient functioning. The Committee strongly recommends that the Department 
should introduce a system and mechanism of foolpro'of monitoring both by the Central and 
State Governments to plug these loopholes so as to put these PHCs in some order. 
; :..·, 
I . ... 
I · . . . . . . 
~ <:~ 
l ' . .. ~ 

y 
I 
17 
X. NEW SCHEMES 
10. The Department has started some new schemes during the year 1996-97. The 
schemes are as under:-
(i) YAWS Eradication Programme 
10.1. YAWS is a disease which causes deformity and destruction leading to economic 
loss to the underprivileged tribal community. Th.e outlay made for this programme is Rs. 
0:50 lakhs. The Committee feels that since it is . a new programme, it may require some 
additional fund which may be released at RE stage. · 
(ii) Hospital Waste Management 
10.2. Hospital Waste Management (HWM) is one of the burning problems faced by all 
the hospitals and the society at large as of today. There are discussions about infections 
being caused and spread through hospital wastes. The problems has received alarming ' 
situations requiring the intervention of courts. There is need for installation of incinerators 
as hospital wastes are a cause of environmental pollution as well. The Committee is happy to 
note that a separate scheme has been launched by the Department of Health to tackle the 
problem of the hospital wastes confronting the society: The allocation made for this scheme 
is Rs. 10 lakhs. Since Hospital Waste Management is one of the essential component of 
health programmes. The Committee feels, that the allocation for this programme ~hould be 
suitably enhanc,:ed so as to facilitate all the hospitals in the country to install incinerators and 
check the spread of various diseases through this menace. 
(iii) Development of Public Private Partnership and Joint Sector Approach 
10.3. Under this Scheme, joint ventures are promoted through equity sharing to 
facilitate the private sector to raise loans from financial institutions, banks, etc. for 
investment in health sector. Hospital Services Consultancy Corporatio ,n, which is a public 
sector undertaking U:ider this Department, would promote the joint ventures. Allocation 
made for this is Rs. 1 crore for 1996-97. 
(iv) National ·Illness Assistance Fund 
10.4. The Committee in its 31st Report on functioning of 'Central Government 
Hospitals' felt the necessity of financial assistance fer poor people for expensive treatment 
such as Cardiac Surgery, etc. The Committee suggested that the Government .should explore 
appropriate resources or funds to assist poor patients coming to hospitals such as AIIMS for 
specific life threatening illness. The Committee desired that if a mechanism such as national 
catastrophic illness assistance fund could be set up, resources could flow from all sources 
including private charities and international agenCies, etc. The Committee is happy to note 
that a scheme called 'National Illness Assistance Fund' is proposed to be set up during the 
current year to assist the poor patients in need of specialised medical treatment for major 
life threatening diseases. This Scheme is on the lines suggested by the Committee. The 
Committee desires that efforts should be made to set up the fund as early as possible. The 
outlay made for the scheme is Rs. 30 crores for 1996-97. The Committee desires that the 
scheme should be given wide publicity to make people aware of the scheme. 
(v) Blood Transfusion :Councils 
10.5. The Department, on the directiqn of the Supreme Court, has set up a National 
Blood Transfusion Council and 19 States and Union Territories have also set up the States! 
Union Territories Councils. The Committee directs that all the remaining States and Union 
\ .... ·'. 
:.: ... 
I.~.,. : 
I' . . ' 
1·::..: . . 
t.:.-:: ... 

18 
Territories should also be asked to set up such councils immediately. This is all the more 
necessary because of the grave danger posed by AIDS which can be transmitted to others 
through blood tran sfusion. The Committee recommend s that Rapid Test Kits for testing 
blood for HIY should be supplied to <Jll hospitals providing Blood Transfusion Services. The 
Department should effectively check the donation of blood by professional blood donors and 
try to encourage voluntary blood donations. The Service:. of Voluntary Organisations/ 
NGO's could be fruitfully utilised for this purpose. The Committee also recommends that 
the mandatory requirement of licence for blood banks should be implemented at the earliest. 
~ . . 
, •.·. : ~ .. 
;. 
: .. . , .. . 
i ! 
.I ~·. 
:. ·!-
, ··: . 
. 
~-t i ··-. 
• I 
,..!: .... ~ . . .. 
.: .I •·!.:' .: 
1, • • 
I ''•'•••, 
.. '.· . ,. 
f .. :. 
: .... '• 
1·~~::, .. ::··: 
t-fi~~rftff~:~·;?~f;!;f;,~;~!\If/ii~jt'i\ii:;S\~i;~~it\ti,#'-t ; ffif';~~,:::;:;~ ;;?t;~~:?":\j\'~X't%f><I7!;~,;·~ •• ~. ·.: 
.··. ,.· ~ 
.. ~· ·~. ,,. 

·.J 
..1 
j 
l 
20 
specialist, which would be applicable to all Central Government Hospitals and the CGHS. 
(para-27) 
10. The DGHS should lay down a well thought out formulary, for different diseases, 
uniformly applicable to all establishments carrying generic and permitted brand name 
medicines without disturbing the physician's right and freedom to prescribe in the best 
interest of the patient. (Para-28) 
11. The functioning of the medical stores leaves much to be desired. There is no proper 
inventory of the medicines. Periodic weeding out of date-expired medicines is not strictly 
followed . There is n0 inspection of these stores. CMOs in-charge should ensure regular 
inventory of the medicin.es and weed out the date expired medicines at periodic intervals. 
Exemplary punishment must be given to the officials found responsible for these lapses. 
(Para-29) 
12. A lot of pilferage of medicines is reported to be taking place in the dispensaries. A 
strict watch is required to be kept over the pilferage of medicines and exemplary punishment 
should be given to those found responsible. (P.ara-30) 
_13. Disposable syringes should be introduced in all dispensaries on an emergency basis. 
Till the disposable syringes are made available in the dispensaries, sterilisation of syringes 
needs to be strictly ensured under the regular supervision and monitoring of CMO. 
Necessary material/ articleslequipments required for sterilisation of syringes must. be made 
available in the dispensaries. (Para-31) 
14. Non-functional dispensaries should be converted into functional dispensaries. Every 
dispensary should have a Resident Doctor and necessary para-medical staff, such as staff 
nurse, pharmacist, ward boy, etc. (Para-33) 
15. There is an urgent need for the upkeep, maintenance and cleanliness of CGHS 
dispensaries. At present, these dispensaries are in a very unhygienic condition and the 
Medical Officers, storekeepers--pharmacists, etc. pay scant attention towards this important 
aspect. The Ministry should issue strict instructions for the proper upkeep and maintenance 
of cleanliness in the dispensaries. The Ministry should also consider privatisation of 
sanitation works in dispensaries. (Para-39) 
16. 'It has been observed that useless and unserviceab le items are lying for years 
together occupying the scarce space in the dispensaries. These items should be condemned 
periodically, and disposed of expeditiously by streamlining rhe procedure. (Para-39) 
17. Punctuality and discipline must be strictly observed by the staff and the doctors. 
They should be sensitised with the work culture they are expected to observe and maintain. 
They should be polite and courteous in their behaviour with the patients. Disciplinary action 
should be taken against doctors and staff accused of misbehaviour. (Para-42) 
18. Periodic inter-zonal as well as intra-zonal transfer of staff may be effected. There 
could be a tenure of three years for rotational transfers. (Para-42) 
19. There is a need for greater coordination between -doctors para-medical staff and the 
other administrative staff working in the dispensaries. This will help to improve the work 
culture and provide better services. (Para-44) · 
20. There should be monthly inspection of dispensaries by the Additional Directors and 
the inspection reports should be reviewed at the higher level to take necessary remedial 
measures. (Para-45) 
... ,. 

/. 
' 
21 
21. The Ministry should immediately introduce evening shift in all the dispensaries to 
enable the office goers to avail of the services after office hours. While the needs and 
difficulties of the staff working in these dispensaries should be taken into account, the 
paramount consideration must be the ultimate satisfaction. of the patients I beneficiaries. 
(Para-46) 
22. The system of night shift of dispensaries for emergency treatments, etc. needs to be 
reviewed keeping in view the medical needs of the beneficiaries. (Para-47) 
23. The Ministry should take initiative to open new dispensaries, particularly in the new 
colonies, keeping in view the difficulties faced by the beneficiaries. The Ministry may take 
up the matter with the Ministry of Finance and convince them of the necessity of opening 
new dispensaries. The Ministry of Finance should adopt a more cooperative attitude in this 
regard. (Para-50) 
24. Emergency services should be adequately strengthened in all the dispensaries, 
especially with regard to the availability of ambulance. Simultaneously the laboratory 
facilities also need to be strengthened so that the beneficiaries are not put to any serious 
inconvenience. (Para~-51 & 52) 
25. The present arrangement of specialist service is not sufficient to meet the 
requirement of the · beneficiaries. The Government should consider strengthening the 
specialist services so as to ensure better patient care and satisfaction. (Para-55) 
26. The scheme of poly-clines is not functioning effectively to the satisfaction of 
beneficiaries. The existing infrastructure of poly-clinics needs to be strengthened. The 
polyclinics should have adequate number of specialists and other staff. The Government 
should work out a well designed policy of rot ation I transfer of the specialists. (Para-59) 
27. The Government should recognise more hospitals in corporate and private sectors 
for the CGHS beneficiaries. The charges could be fixed for different kinds of treatment so 
that beneficiaries are free to take treatment in any hospital and claim reimbursement. There 
could be a system of some revolving fund with these recognised hospitals so that any 
beneficiary could get the treatment there and the charges could be adjusted later. (Para-63.) 
. 28. In order to supplement the CGHS facilities with private hospital services, the 
CGHS should evaluate such facilities, recogni~,e more hospitals and lay down reasonable 
rates of payments, on a uniform basis. There could also be arrangements for a separate 
CGHS wing, on an earmarked basis, reserving· beds in the hospital general wards for CGHS 
patients. (Para-81) 
29. Some private hospitals are given exemption in customs duty for the import of 
hospital equipments and are also provided land, institutional finance, etc. on concessional 
rates. The Government should ensure that these. hospitals in turn reciprocate by providing 
free/ concessional treatment and beds to the poor beneficiaries. (Para-84) 
30. The reimbursement of money spent on purchasing medicines takes unduly long 
time. The procedure for reimbursement should be simplified so as to avoid delays. The 
Ministry and the CGHS should review the existing system and fix time limits for reimbursing 
the cost by streamlining the procedure. (Par.a-66) 
31. The Ministry should take immediate steps to improve staff morale and efficiency. 
The staff strength available in the dispensaries is less than the sanctioned strength. The 
shortage of staff has to be made good keeping in view the necessity of the · patients I 
,, 
. ' .... 
,· .-· 
, • 
., 
.::·-.. 

22 
beneficiaries. Though there was an increase in the number of doctors, there is no 
proportionate increase in the para-medical staff. All vacant posts should be filled up. CGHS 
should keep a pool of leave reserve doctors and para-medical staff and for this, additional 
posts may have to be created. There should be periodic review of work load and norms so 
that physicians are not burdened with overcrowding of patients. Possibility of employing 
doctors on contract basis may also be considered. The Ministry of Finance may be 
approached for sanction of additional posts as per the justified strength. (Para-88) 
32. A quota may be prescribed for promotion of Group 'C' and 'D' employees 
depending upon the length of service and acquisition of required qualification. (Para-89) 
33. Private practice by Government doctors employed in CGHS dispensaries and clinics 
should be stopped and stringent action taken against those violating the rules. (Para-90) 
34. CGHS doctors must be given adequate opportunity to keep themselves abreast of 
the new advancements by providing opportunities to participate in national and international 
seminars, workshops and training programmes. The promotional avenues of the doctors may 
be linked with the training programmestefresher courses attended by them. (Para-91) 
35. The Ministry should ensure that complaint boxes are available and conspicuously 
displayed at prominent places in the dispensaries. Prompt action should be taken on each 
and every complaint. (Para-92) 
36. The Government may consider providing some facilities such as telephones, etc. to 
the Area · Welfare Officers, besides some monetary incentives .. The Area Welfare Officers' 
suggestions should be given due weightage keeping in view the beneficiaries grievance. 
(Para-95) 
37. Government may also consider appointing CGHS Beneficiaries Welfare Committees 
.. for each dispensary, involving the Chief Medical Officer, the Area Welfare Officer and 
.. representatives of the Resident Welfare Associations. (Para-95) 
38. The Ministry should give due consideration to the problems of senior citizens and 
try to take a sympathetic view of the problems faced by them. Necessary instructions be 
issued for according priority in treatment to senior citizens. The Government should try to 
identif :r :~reas where there is comparatively large · concentration of retired Central 
Government employees and provide them CGHS coverage. The possibility of allowing 
pensior:ers to seek treatment in local recognised hospitals and get reimbursement thereafter 
may a!so be explored. A complete study of the CGHS related issue and the problems faced 
by pen~:ioners may be undertaken .and a plan of action drawn up. (Paras-~02 & 103) 
39. The Government may examine I explore .alternatives for replacing CGHS with 
Health Im•1rance Cover, initially starting with senior citizens and later on extending it to 
serving emFioyees as well. Expert opinion may be obtained to see how far innovative 
measures, such as 'Medisave' scheme of Singapore, can help introduce suitable insurance 
cover to salaried employees. A working group to prepare the details of this scheme could be 
set up. [Para-104 (a)] 
40. The Government may also examine whether the on-going CGHS could be 
converted from purely departmental activity into a more manageable quasi-Governmental 
set-up managed by trust or trusts. A modified CGHS system, operated on a decentrnlized 
basis outside Government control, would be able. to make CGHS more responsive to patient 
needs in its work arrangements. The CGHS could, thus, be converted from a departmental 
undertaking into three or four trusts covering beneficiaries in different parts of the country. 
[Para-104 (b)) 
'r 
'1 
... ·· 
. ··. '~ 
1<·-. 
(:.:;_y. 
r.: ... t: :.; .. 
(;::~;f;: 
n.t·~:· 
InA,,, 
i ~·· ·· .. ~ 
~ .. ---
J, .;··. 
: . . 
~- .. 
·. ·· .. ' . ; .-... :--.. 
. · .. . ·. 
· .. ·. :. ~ ·.- . 

ANNEXURE-II 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS I OBSERVATIONS OF 31ST REPORT 
1. Overcrowding 
Hospitals in or outside Delhi are extremely overcrowded with patients. This is mainly 
due to Jack of adequate medical care facilities and personnel at the PHCs', and the dist·rict 
and sub-district hospitals for providing primary and secondary level of treatment to patients. 
As a result of this, patients from all parts of the country directly approach the hospitals even 
for minor ailments instead of going to the PHCs or the district and sub-district hospitals. 
Another factor, particular to Delhi, is that some patients try to approach many hospitals, 
one after the other, for the same ailment for psychological satisfaction. (Para 4) 
This results in shortage of beds, resulting in two to three patients sharing the .same bed 
in many hospitals. The hospital authorities cannot increase the number of beds due to acute 
shortage of space. The solution to the problem is that the Government should pay 
immediate attention to improve and expand facilities for medical care at the primary and 
secondary ·levels so . that only those patients needing specialist care and attention, ·are 
referred to the tertiary level hospitals located in the Metro cities. The problem could be also 
tackled partly by setting up screening OPDs, with essential testing facilities slightly away 
from the· main hospitals. "Fhe Committee, therefore, recommends that overcrowding may be 
reduced by simultaneous improvement in: · 
(a) the levels of management efficiency in hospitals; 
(b) improvement in peripheral facilities in District and Sub-districts hospitals for 
primary and secondary treatment; and 
(c) organising a functionaf referral sys.tem. (Para 4. 7) 
There is a need to optimise all existing and available physical facilities to control 
overcrowding. The Committee would emphasise the necessity for opening more counters and 
creating space for patients attending OPDs. There is also a need for proper guidance and 
direction to patients approaching the OPDs so that patients dq not have ·to wander from one 
counter to another. This will, to some extent, ease congestion and overcrowding of patients 
at strategic points. There is also an urgent need to reduce the waiting time of the patients at 
various counters keeping in view the patients' convenience. The underlying idea behind this 
proposal should be that the patients visiting OPD do not have to spend more than half a day -
at the hospitals for purpose of consultation/treatment, etc. (Para 4.12) 
2. Referral Character 
The premier institutions like the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) and 
the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research were set up to promote high 
standards of medical care, training and research. These were originally marked as referral 
hospitals where patients would be referred by other hospitals for a specialised treatment of a 
high ordt!r. These hospital s were n~)t supposed to entertain new patients, with common 
disease:-., which cuuid be trea ted at the ordinary hospitals. In course of time, due to non-
23 
. : ~. . . . ., 
.. ·.:.·. 
···:·<· 

24 
availability of primary health care facilities at the peripheral health centres resulting in inDl!x of 
patients to the metro cities. The premier instituti~ns like AIIMS and PGIMER have lost their 
referral character as they have to attend to all kinds of patients, irrespective of the nature of 
disease. This has prevented specialists to carry out research of the highest order as their 
attention is primarily focussed on the day to day medical problem of ordinary patients. (Para 5) 
The Committee was informed that there was a proposal under consideration with the 
Government to restore to AIIMS and PGIMER their referral character. The Committee would 
like to know the fate of the proposal. The Government should draw a time-bound programme 
to conyert these hospitals into purely referral hospitals and sort out all the related issues I 
problems of strengthening the peripheral medical facilities by providing them adequate finance 
and other resources. (Para 5.3) 
3. Computerisation 
There is an immediate need for providing computers in the hospitals for maintenance of 
patient - related records, and for better coordination between various departments /wings of 
the hospitals. (Para 6) 
4. Duplication of Facilities 
Duplication of specialist services in the hospitals results in non-optimal use of scarce 
resources. This requires proper co-ordination.and redesignation of the hospitals with specialised 
services .. There is a need for greater horizontalliaisoning among the specialists and to evolve a 
scheme for linking a group of smaller hospitals with one major hospital having specialists' 
expertise. For example, neuro-surgery facilities to deal with accident cases could be made 
available in one hospital and a group of smaller hospitals could make use of these services for 
entire region. (Para 7.1) 
Duplication of services, and facilities in hospitals, particularly in view of the constraints of 
space, beds and financial resources, results in wasteful expenditure and, thus, should be avoided 
as far as possible. Every hospital could specialise in a particular area I discipline so that the 
patients know which hospital they should approach for a particular disease/treatment 
(Para 7.2) 
5. Coordination amongst Hospitals 
Duplication of services I facilities cannot be altogether avoided unless there is a proper and 
efficient coordination between various hospitals there should be a close liaison and coordination 
among di.fferent hospitals for making available efficient specialist services to patients. For 
example, Safdarjung Hospital and AIIMS could work with greater coordination between them 
so as to reduce the burden on each other. (Para 8) 
6. More autonomy to Medical Superintendents 
Medical Superintendents of some hospitals have voiced concern about their dependence on 
the Ministry even for day-to -day works needing immediate attention. This results in avoidable 
delay, affecting the efficiency and quality of services rendered by the hospitals. (Para 9) 
The Committee recommends that the Medical Superintendents should'be given more 
autonomy to enable them to discharge their functions more efficiently. The Ministry may 
consider redesignating the posts of Merlical Superintendents of major hospitals as 'Directors' 
with all the concomitant powers. Such redesignation would not have any financial implication as 
the posts of Medical Superintendents of major hospitals have already been upgraded to that of 
Additoinal D.G. of Health. Services, whjch is equivalent to the rank of Additional Secretary to 
the Government of India. (Para 9.1) 
- ·:'. 
..,.. 
;. 
:. ~: .: 
f•'>-
r~=;·!.; 
h};i: 
~;:;i. 
ft~ L::} 
L5:: 
_;- ' ( ;-:~._.::~· 

~::-::: - ~· :·-r .. .. . ·.- ~ 
25 
7. Maintenance/Repair of Medical Equipment 
Maintenance of sophisticated and costly equipments is very crucial keeping_ in view the 
investments made in their procurement and also the patients' care and convenience. The 
Government should consider running of workshop in Delhi for this purpose where all the 
medical equipments and appliances could be serviced I repaired without delays. (Para 10) 
8. Strengthening of Blood Banks 
The Blood Banks in the Central Government hospitals have no modern facilities and 
equipments commensurate with the nature of services required today. There is an urgent 
need to look into this problem, keeping in view the detection of new and deadly diseases 
like AIDS etc. The Government should provide HIV tests facilities and modern blood banks 
in each hospital where fractionation of .blood into its different components can be done and 
the transfusion of blood is made foolproof. (Para 11) 
9. Poor Performance of Family Welfare 
The Committee found that the infrastructure provided in the Family Welfare Units in 
each hospital was not being put of op-vimum use. Near total Jack of motivation and 
dedication in the staff was also noticed. The Committee is surprised to note the indifferent 
and nonchalant attitude of the Ministry/hospitals in regard to such a high priority aspect of 
our socio-economic development. It, therefore, recommends that family welfare units 
provided in the Central Government hospitals be strengthened and activated immediately. 
(Para 12) 
10. Campaign against AIDS 
The Central Government hospitals, which are supposed to be role models in campaign 
against AIDS, do not appear to be serious about in. The Committee, therefore, feels that 
the Central Government hospitals should launch massive· campaign against the spread of this 
deadly disease. (Para 13) 
11. Establishing ·an epilepsy Centre 
Epilepsy in our country is being treated in Neurological centres of the major hospitals 
where the •facilities available for its treatment are inefficient and unorganised. The 
Committee feels that there is an imperative · need to establish an Epilepsy centre, to begin 
with, in New Delhi. Once this centre is developed, similar centres, either separate or 
branches thereof, should be set up in other parts of the country. (Para 14.1) 
12. Exposure of Doctors to latest Development 
With the advancement of medical science and technology, there is an urgent need for 
doctors/professors to keep pace with the latest medical innovations so as to pass on the 
benefit of these advancements to patient care. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Doctors and Faculty Members should be provided with adequate opportunities to 
undergo training, and refresher courses, from time to time, to improve the quality of 
services. Simultaneously, the technicians/para medical staff handling various sophisticated 
and modern medical equipments should also be given requisite training to facilitate efficient 
handling of these equipruents and bring precision in their work. (Para 15) 
~? ;:\;_\~;. ·:-::;';: 
:.· .. -.. ~ ·•· ,.·.· : .. .:,. 
:;iJZ:;~::~::f 
~i;t ~i 
> . 
,; · .. 
,· .'.': 
,• .· 
.• •· .. 
::?l: 
··:::. ::>"·::·: ~. ·::.·::>:x~:n-.::}~t;= :_:.::J; ; :::;.: 

. .! 
''• 
·· ... ! ... 
26 
.. 
·- 13. Problem of Cleanliness and Maintenance 
~ 0 · , 
' 
: j 
• '1 
Cleanliness and hygienic conditions in various hospitals are of very poor standJr d. 
Choked sewage leaking water pipes, stinking toilets and heaps of garbage lying uncovered in 
various comers of the hospitals could be seen almost in every hospital. The Committee is 
deeply distressed to see such unhygienic conditions and the hospital authorities paying scant 
attention to such an important aspect of medical care. The hospital buildings, including the 
Operation Theatres and the wards, are no better in their upkeep and maintenance. (Para 16) 
One of the reasons cited for this state of affairs is that the CPWD, which is primarily 
responsible for the maintenance of the buildings, is not giving prompt and efficient services 
and they are also not under the direct administrative control of the hospital authorities. The 
hospitals should, therefore, either have their own engineering departments or the CPWD 
unit should be put under the direct administrative control of the respective Medical 
Superintendents to control and supervise the maintenance work. (Pa_ra 16.1) 
14. Shortage of Staff 
The shortage of staff particularly in Group 'C' and 'D' categories, in almost all the 
hospitals has been observed by the Committee. Similar was the position for many posts of 
faculty members and senior doctors which were lying vacant for years together. The problem 
was more prominent in JIPMER, Pondicherry, where no one is willing to go because of the 
distance factor. Similarly, in AIIPMER, Bombay, doctors are reluctant to join mainly 
because of acute shortage of residential accommodation. Unattractive pay-scales have also 
been cited as another reason for doctors not joining the Government institutes. Further, 
while the number of doctors over a period of time, has increased manifold, there is no 
corresponding increase in the staff of Group 'C' and 'D' categories. (Para 17) 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that shortage of staff in Group 'C' and 
'D' categories should be immediately made good and procedure of filling the higher level 
posts should be reviewed and streamlined to avoid delays in recruitments. (Para 17.2) 
15. Doctors on Prolonged Deputation 
The Committee deprecates the practice of doctonvprofessors going on deputation and 
coming back at the time of promotions, which is against the very ethics of medical 
profession. It, therefore, recommends that the Department should take a serious view in 
these cases and discourage such practices. (Para 18) 
16. Indiscipline in Hospitals 
Complaints of rude behaviour by Doctors and other staff in hospitals are a common 
feature. There is no cordial relationship between the hospital administration and the 
employees either. Irresponsible unionism is very much rampant amongst the employees, 
culminating, quite often, in 'Bandhs' and 'Strikes'. There is no effective grievance redressal 
machinery in the hospitals. While the genuine grievances of the employees should be 
redressed promptly, through the medium of JCMs or other grievance redressal machineries, 
indiscipline resulting in chaotic situations, causing inconvenience to patients, should be 
firmly dealt with. It would be useful to set up a mechanism similar to the JCM in 
Government establishm~nts, in each hospital to redress the grievances of the staff . The role 
and functions of hospital Management Boards ~!so need to be redefined in order to improve 
the effectiveness and cred:bility of these Boards. The services of outside experts in these 
Boards may also be utilised to improve the state of affairs. (Para 19) 
.. . '. . _ ...... .. ··.·· ·· 
' l 
' r. 
f..'_. 
\;, 
\o:. • • . ·· .. 

27 
17. Lack of Residential Accommodation 
Doctors and nurses are responsible for running the patient care services round the clock 
and are required to come to hospitals at odd hours at short notice. In case they are provided 
residential accommodation nearer the hospitals they would be able to discharge their duties 
more efficiently and promptly. The Committee; therefore, recommends that sufficient 
number of residential units for all categories of employees be provided in the hospital pools 
and the Department should also take up the matter with the Ministry of Urban Affairs and 
Employment to get adequate number of quarters earmarked for the hospital functionaries in 
the nearby Government colonies. There is also a strong-felt need to provide adequate 
hospital accommodation to the resident doctors and nurses, preferably within the campus of 
the hospital itself. Nurses should also be given priority in the Working Women's Hostels 
situated near the hospitals. (Para 20.4) 
The Committee is happy to learn that there is a proposal to construct Delhi Nurses 
Colony in Srinivaspuri for which the possession of land has been taken. There are proposals 
in hand to acquire two acres of land in Rohini. The Committee is, however, distressed to 
note ·that funds for the purpose were not provided by the Ministry of Finance last year and 
recommends that sufficient funds be allocated for this purpose. The Ministry of Health may 
also vigorously pursue the matter of allocation of land at suitable si..:es with the D.D.A. and 
N.O.I.D.A. for construction of residential quarters for the hospital employees. (Paras 20.1 
& 20.3) 
18. Separate CGHS Wings 
The CGHS Wings, presently earmarked and functioning in Safdarjung and Dr. Ram 
Manohar Lohia Hospitals, are not geared enough to cope with the needs of the CGHS 
beneficiaries. At times, the time taken in the CGHS wings is more than the time taken in 
the general OPD's. It is, therefore, recommeded that the procedures for consultation/tests 
etc. in the CGHS wings of the hospitals need to be thoroughly streamlined so as to provide 
prompt and efficient services. (Para 21) 
19. Senior Citizens 
There should be special arrangements in the hospitals for the senior citizens and the 
retired CGHS beneficiaries keeping in view their old age problems. (Para 22) 
20. Geriatrics 
'The Committee recommends that Government should take necessary steps to develop 
geriatrics as specialised subject, and provide sufficient number of specialists and 
infrastructure for opening Geriatric Clinics in all the Central Government hospitals. 
(Para 23) 
21. Provision for Poor Patients 
The Committee has noted that several major invasive procedures, e.g. cardiac surgery 
are far too expensive for the poor people. Therefore, it would suggest the Ministry must 
urgently explore all appropriate sources of funds to assist poor patients coming to AIIMS or 
other Central Government hospitals for specific life threatening illnesses. If a mechanism can 
be set up, such as a National Catastrophic lllness Assistance Fund, then resources can flow 
from all sources, induding private charities and international agencies and organisation. 
Besides, there can be many imaginative methods of requiring both government and private 
:.: .. - .... : ". · .... .. 
• • 4 ~ .... .. 
i ·: .. 
. , 
I .. 
.. . . 
:. 1.::·· 

28 
hospitals of a certain size and even profit -making nursing homes to make earmarked 
contributions to the fund. (Paras 24.1 & · 24.2) 
22. Facilities for Visitors/Attendants 
The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to construct 'DharmashalaSISarais' by 
the Government, in association with charitable institutions, wh·o may be interested in this 
noble cause. Such institutions should ·be provided all necessary help in procuring land etc. on 
concessional rates by the Government. (Para 25.1) 
23. Budget 
The Committee noticed that there was a general complaint about the lack of adequate 
funds and in fact, it was cited as one of the reasons for several problems in the hospitals. The 
Committee is fully aware of the general resource crunch in the country. It, however, feels that 
in view of the need for improving quality and adequacy of medical care, the Government 
should explore the possibilities of generating-Sparing more resources for allocation to this 
sector. (Para 26.2) · 
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES, NEW DELID 
1. The Committee found the AIIMS Hospital highly crowded. It was informed that more 
than seventeen lakhs patients visit the Hospital each year, while the capacity is just enough for 
six lakh patients only. Such over-crowding level is affecting adversely not only the patient care 
in the Hospital but also the quality of research and training in it. The Committee emphasised 
the need to do something urgently in this regard. 
· 2. The Committee feels that no progress is likely to be made, unless some crucial, initial 
steps are taken right now to mitigate, if not eliminate, overcrowding in OPD. The Committee 
emphasises the need for consciously trying to bring down the waiting time and making resting 
facilities easily accessible and cheaper. The Committee wonld also emphasise that for making 
the AIIMS a purely referral hospital, efforts must be made to coordinate various planning 
decisions at the Centre and in the states and to ensure adequate and timely allocation of funds 
for .- the development of selected peripheral hospitals around Delhi and in the neighbouring 
States, which will contain the bulk of the admission rush to AIIMS. (AIM 8.1) 
3. The Institute, because of ·over-crowding is facing an acute shortage of space. It has 
already been decided to shift the existing OPD, alongwith basic testing facilities to a nearby 
locality, Raj Nagar, foundation-stone of which has already been laid. (AIM 8) 
4. A system of deputing senior specialist from AIIMS to the peripheral hospitals as 
visiting professoli'faculties to help raise the standard of patient care may be considered. 
(AIM 8 and 8.1) 
5. The Committee was made aware of the original idea of having a linkage between the 
AIIMS and the Safdarjung Hospital, with the latter acting as the focus for primary treatment 
and a reference for complicated cases to be sent to AIIMS. The Committee feels that the 
possibility of such a linkage should continue to be kept in mind and explored because it would 
enable an integrated view of cost-effective use of resources and demonstrate as to how an 
effective referral system can be developed. (AIM 9) 
6. While the intention of the Committee is not to allow the specialisation built up in 
Safdarjung to whither.away, it emphasises the fact that the facilities in AIIMS and Safdarjung 
Hospital, should be complementary and supplementary to each other and duplication of 
facilities be avoided to the extent possible. (AIM 9.2) 
o-;" ~:·:~ ;::~-:.--·~- -- ...... ~ : -;- •.• • • . . • "." • .•: w. o : •: • 
.. · 
l
- ~-
Jr~ 
-:} 
' r jt 
~:.?, 
rr.:~·~ 
r~n. 
,rl 
t i._ '• 
!i.~~ 
l
f.Ji~; 
·,>iif 
:t;; 
·.;- ··: 
l :,_ . .-. 
I . 
! :.- _;_-:: . 

29 
7. The Commit tee i:Jbs given t:-~uch thought. ~v l~e. quest icr;. o: closure o: disc~ntinuznc.e 
of unde rgraduate education, and links tha t see m to exist among unbearable overcro wdin~ 
levels, undergr~1duat es' educational needs and constraints on referral status. The Committee 
is of the view that the Depart ment must, on balance, and taking a long terrn view of the 
sustainabilit y of high level of competence at AIIMS, reloc ate the undergraduate seats at an 
alternative institutions taking the m away from AIIMS. (AIM 10.3) 
8. The Committee wou ld, therefore, recommend that serious thought should be given to 
early possibility of doing away with the .undergraduate education at AIIMS, more so because 
of the need to restore the referral character of the Institute. If overcrowding at AIIMS is to 
be tackl ed effectively, we should not accentuate the problem by provision of general medical 
care merely to provide for undergraduate education. (AIM 10.4) 
9. There is no coor9ination among various wings of the Institute. The Committee would 
stress the need for a more coherent and integrated command structure within AIIMS 
(including its various associated centres) in the interest of efficiency and better patient care. 
(Para 11) 
10. The Committee recognises the difficulty in evolving such a command structure in an 
institution of high competence like AIIMS. The Committee would suggest that the 
Government should urgently review how a structure composed of collegiate and interactive 
leadership, greater transparent relationships and channels of easy communication between 
different levels of faculty, between faculty and students and among various centres and 
discipline can be brought about within a year or so. (AIM 11.2) 
11. The Committee takes a serious note of a widely shared view that morale of 
individuals of AIIMS faculty, is low because of instances of individuals with proximity to 
.high places, disturbing the evolution of a coherent command structure and creating 
handicaps to the evolution of a harmonious collegiate policy and decision making, so 
urgently needed at AIIMS. (AIM 11.3) 
12. The Committee would recommend the development in the Ministry of an 
independent data base of tech nology developments (and associated unit cost) in medical 
care, so that comparative unit cost for hC?spital procedure and routines at different locations, 
can be examined to ensure cost-effective use of resources. In a vast country like India, 
technological frontiers and opportunities for state-of-the-art cure in medicine should be 
dispersed among a variety of institutions, both public and p:-:vate in different parts of India, 
and regu lated through a framework of coordinated promotion. (AIM 12) 
13. The Committee would suggest setting up an independent technology assessment 
group to look at directions of future development in medical science, relevant to our 
epidemiological prob lems. In respect of disciplines available at the Institute and at different 
Institutions of excellence all over the country, the group could be asked to suggest a 
framework for their future growth path, avoiding needless duplication of facilities in 
Government hospitals. In the Committee's view, such an exercise may help avoid dup lication 
of facilities and wasteful repetitive investment in high cost equipment and facilities which 
need to be cost-effectively utilised. (AIM (3) 
14. Committee has given serious thought to the propriety of continuing with the practice 
of the Health Minister being nominated as the President of the Institute. Recently a one­
man enqu1ry Committee had come to th e conclusion, much to the Committee's dismay, to 
make it a fornwl :1:rangement under which the Minister could always be ex-officio President. 
After ca r~ful C\.l ii-' l a~ratiLlll of all aspects of the matter, the Committee would unequivocally 
....... ·.· 
, •... . -·k 
;,,· 
.· 
..... '!'. · 
;_ .. ... 
.. ... 

30 
recomm~nd that the Government should not accept the view .of the said enquiry committee 
and, if possible, formally terminate the arrangement und er which the Health Minister and 
Health Secretary are appointed as Members of the Institute's Board. Unless such changes in 
policy are made, it is not possible to ensure autonomy of the Institute in practice. (AIM 14.4 
& 14.5) 
15. An appropriately eminent person drawn from the profession, can be appointed as 
Member of the Institute Body and later nominated as President, as has been done in IIMS , 
!ITs and Chitra Tirunal Institute at Trivandrum. Advantage of such a course would find 
the ir respective roles distinct, without either undue Government interference or without the 
Institute abdicating its responsibility. (AIM 14.3) 
16. The Committee emphasises the need for (a) providing more beds in the 
Gynaecology and Obstetrics wards; (b) expanding modernising the Nursery; (c) replacing 
the over-used and old equipments and (d) encouraging research and training in the 
Department. (AIM 15.1) 
17. Increasing incidence of diabetics and stress related diseases like hypertension due 
mainly to changing life style and high level of pollution, number of persons having renal 
problem is going up on alarming rate. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends to 
expand/strengthen Nephrology wards and facilities for research and training in the 
Department of Renal Sciences at the earliest. (AIM 16) 
18. The Committee was informed that, over the years, the expenditure of the Institute 
has increased tremendously with no corresponding increase in the funds. The annual increase 
in the budget, in fact, gets neutraEsed by the existing rate of inflation. The Committee 
recommends that the inflation on non-plan expenditure should be taken into consideration 
while allocating funds not only to the AIIMS but also to all the Central Government 
hospitals. (AIM 17) 
POST-GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION 
AND RESEARCH (PGIMER), CHANDIGARH 
1. The average number of outdoor patients visiting the OPD is very high, which affects 
the efficiency and quality of services provided by the hospital. In view of this, the 
Committee emphasises the need to have a separate OPD and emergency, with essential 
testing facilities etc. away from the main Institute, in order to avoid overcrowding. (PGI 4) 
2. The Committee feels that the other remedy could be to strengthen services in the 
Medical Colleges and Hospita ls around it so that rush to the Institute can be contained. The 
concerned State Governments, the Committee feels should display due interest in developing 
health facilities in their areas on a priority basis. (PGI 5) 
3. The Committee feels that the necessary formalities and requirements towards 
establishing 500 bed hospital in Chandigarh Medical College which has already been unduly 
delayed, should be completed by the Department of Health in consultation with the 
concerned Ministries/Departments. Ministry of Finance should make necessary allocations 
for the proposed hospital so that it is set up within a reasonable time-schedule. (PGI 6) 
4. The Committee is of the view that the number of beds in the Department of 
Obstetrics & Gynaecology be increased suitably so that the resulting complications and 
inconvenience to patients is avoided. (PGI 7) . 
5. The Committee is deeply concerned at such a high-death rate in the Institute. 
(PGI 8) 
6. The Committee expresses its deep concern about vacuncit.:s 10 teaching pusiti o lls, a:. 
........ : ·· .... ·· .-.. ·.--.·. '• ....... .. ... .. . • • "• , - •' . .. ••• , -· • • • 'I, • ·~ •• ... . ' . . • '• • • •• , . . ·• :· . . ... . . 
... =.· ..... , 
I ·. 
~ .... . 
'fi.,:-. ·:· · . . . . . 
~ f • 
,. 

31 
well as in Group 'C' and 'D' posts, remammg unfilled for long period s. The Committee 
recommends that immediate steps should be taken to fill up the vacancies. The Committee 
feels that the suggetions of the Director, PGIMER, regarding appointments to all class I 
posts by the Institute's Body and providing more autonomy to the Director need serious 
consideration by the Department (PGI 9.1) 
7. The Committee feels that the Department appears to have adopted an indifferent 
attitude to the grievances of the faculty members of the College of Nursing. It is surprising 
that a proper cadre structure for the College has never been planned. The Committee 
recommends that the Department should implement all the relevant recommendations/ 
directions of various bodies mentioned in para PGI 9.2. Efforts should also be made for 
creating adequate posts in the college as recommended by the Nursing Council of India. 
(PGI 9.3) 
8. The Committee does not agree with the proposition of allowing private practice and 
feels that this suggest ion, if implemented, would give rise to more problems than it intends 
to solve. (PGI 10) 
9. The Committee recommends that suitable provisions be made in the budget of the 
Institute next year for constructing residential quarters for which enough space is available in 
the premises of the Institute. (PGI 11) 
10. The Committee, strongly recommends provision of adequate Funds and other 
facilities at the earliest (i) for upgrading Radiotherapy Department into a Regional Cancer 
Centre, (ii) providing a Trauma Centre and (iii) for strengthening the Neuro-surgery Centre, 
(PGI 12.1) 
11. The Committee was surprised to learn that there were no facilities for Lithotripsy 
and MRI in this premier Institute. The Committee feels that the facilities mentioned above 
be prc·.-ided to the Institute early. (PGI 13) 
12. The Committee. places on record its appreciation of the "Janta Sarais" facilities 
provided at the Institute. Charitable Trusts and other such bodies be approached for running 
such 'Santis' or 'Dh:umashalas' and the government should provide necessary facilities! 
Concessions in procuring land etc. to the bodies/institutions interested in the matter. 
(PGI 14) . . 
13. The Commitree noticed that books particularly the new arrivals, were not properly 
displayed. Older books, were found in very bad shape. The Committee feels that most of 
them need binding. The Committee feel that there is a need for looking into the reasons for 
the Library not attracting good number of readers and improving its working. (PGI 15) 
14. The Committee feels that there is urgent need for creating a better understanding 
between the authorities and employees of the Institute. It, therefore, emphasises the need 
for reviving the JCM urgently. The hospital administration, the Committee feels, needs to be 
more flexible and transparent in its functioning. (PGI 16) 
15. The points raised by the Resident Doctors (see para 17), the Committee feels, 
deserve immediate and sympathetic consideration by the Government. (PG I 17) 
16. The Committee feels that the demand of the Institute for more funds for taking up 
new projects app ct:rs to be justified and recommends that the Department should provide 
the required amount at an appropriate stage. (PGI 18.2) 
.. · 
~r:;r : 
' 
. . ·,;. 
:f -~~:· 
thf:·_: 
f
·'· :;,, 
·:~:.;~. "':" 
.. ·· .. . ... 
! .. ·. ·· ... 
' . r ;·· ·: 
,·· .· 
•·. ' 
.. ·• : 
; . 
•• r: . . 

32 
JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST-GRADUA'l'E MEDICAL EDUCATION f-J\r0 
RESE:ARCE (J:PI\'i:ER), PONDICITCRRY 
1. The Committee feels that adequate facilities should be provided in the waiting hal) 
and steps taken to clean ~nd bea utif: its campus at the eariiest. (J:P 3) 
2. The Committee feels that the progress in respect of compu terisation is very slow and 
nee ds to be expedited. (JIP 4) 
3. The Committee was informed that a proposal for providing neuro-surgery centre and 
kindney transplant facilities is pending with the Government. The Committee recommends 
that the proposal should be considered and cleared without fur ther delay. (JIP 5) 
4. The Committee suggests that extra beds should be provided in Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology Department on priority basis. (JIP 6) 
· 5. The Committee recommends that construction work of new OPD should be taken up 
immediately. (JIP 7) 
6. The Committee feels that granting autonomy could be conducive to the progress of 
the Institute and there is a need to initiate the process after convincing the employees in this 
regard . (JIP 8) 
7. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for providing adequate number of 
quarters for all categories of staff. (JIP 9) 
8. Absence of facilities for recreation , such as an Auditorium and infra structure for 
indoor games etc. for students was also brought to the notice of the Committee. The 
Committee feels that these facilities should be provided at the earliest. (JIP 10) 
9. The Committee recommends that all-out efforts be made to fill up the existing 
vacancies without further delay. (JIP 11) 
10. The Committee feels that the suggestion of transfering faculty members from three 
Institutions. i.e. LHMC, Maulana Azad Medical College and University College of Medical 
Sciences, Delhi, to the JIPMER should be considered in all its aspects and implemented at 
the earliest. (JIP 11.1) 
11. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for sanctioning these posts and 
recommend s that the proposal of the SIU needs expeditious disposal. (JIP 11.2) 
· 12. The Committee, recomme nds that the allocation for the Insitutute be enhanced 
suitably keeping in view the requirements of the Institute. (JIP 12) 
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF PHYSICAL MEDICINE AND REHABU.ITATION (AIIPMER), 
BOMBAY 
1. The Committee found that the Institute \\:'as doing a recomend able job, particularly 
in providing mechanical aids and appliances to the spastic and handicapped people, including 
cripp led children. (AlP 2) 
R·~_ :::;:--- .·~-~ ..... ·~· · ... -... ·.··-•••,•,·::··: ->: ·-.: ····:.·. -· ; • "·. ·" . -. : • •·• • r -.· .. 
l . 
f • • 
I . · 
1 ••• •• 
r:\~ 
'•. ..... : 

33 
2. The Committee notes that, in the absence · of adequate staff, the services being 
provided in the Institute are being affected adversely which needs to be avoided by all 
means. The Committee, therefore, recommends that immediate steps be taken to create the 
required number of posts in all categories and also fill up the posts lying vacant now. 
(AlP 3.1) 
3. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for p.;oviding adequate number of 
trained orthopaedic surgeons in the Institute. (AIP 3.2) 
4. It was also pointed out to the Committee that the teaching staff of the Institute, 
specially MSc(OT) and MSc(PT), do not have the corresponding designation nor do they 
have the pay-scale equivalent to those in other teaching institutions. The Committee feels 
that such a discrimination is not justified and their demands for siiliiJar designation and pay­
scale should be considered for immediate implementati6n. (AI~:3) 
5. The Committee recommends that the Government should provide adequate number 
of quarters for doctors and staff of the Institute. The Committee feels that keeping some 
quarters at the disposal of the Director, as is the case in Safdaijung Hospital~ should also be 
considered. Construction of a residential complex in the Institute's premises on the land 
lying vacant should be given serious thought by the Department of Health. (AIP 4) 
6. The Committee is of the view that the production base of the workshop 
manufacturing various appliances/devices for handicapped people, particularly its smithy 
section, ~hould be expanded and modernised so as to enable the Institute to take up the 
production of appliances etc. on a large scale and also to market them. It will help the 
Institute, the Committee feels, to augment its sources of income. The Committee 
recommends that the requirements of the Institute should be assessed that suitable funds be 
made available to the Institute for this purpose. (Aif 5.1) 
7. The Committee emphasises the need for introducing newer trades and separate 
sections 'in the Vocational Training Workshop. (AIP 6) 
8. The Committee is of the opinion that the old buildings in which the workshops are 
being run, can be demolished and a multi-storeyed building can be constructed where some 
of the Departments can also be shifted. (AlP 7) 
9. The Comm ittee recommends that the Department of Health should get the pending 
proposal for constructing a building approved from the Planning Commission at the earliest. 
Appointing an Architect based in Bombay or taking the help of CPWD, Bombay, should 
also be considered. (AlP 7.1) 
10. The Committee feels that the stipend being paid to the vocational guidance trainees 
is very meagre and, therefore, recommends that it should be increased suitably. More 
organisations, such as Indian Oil Corporation, ONGC, Steel Authority of India and other 
nationalised banks should be persuaded to contribute for this cause. (AlP 8) 
11. The Committee, is of the view that providing adequate facilities to visitors! 
attendants of the patients needs a serious consideration by the Department. (AIP 9) 
12. The Committee noticed that there is. lack of space in almost all the Departments 
and there is also a need to modernise and expand its various workshops for which the 
Committee feeb the allocation would be insufficient. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends th at lhe budgetary provision for the Institute be raised suitably. (AlP 10.1) 
,. 
• 1 ~ 
"'-.. : ... _. 
)~.:;::,;·.:=};~~~·~ ~· 
~::3?:1 
:-<:;~P..~;; 
_s~:~r:.)) 
•.<>V'<!·'· 
['"''''{· 
. }?f;; . . -: ~- . 
~:~~~~~·:; 
.;.~~.~ 
r· r.-
(:;"< 
[·':~=:~.~: 
l\\' 
F:~·~i 
t>-' ~·s 
r: : . .. .. 
1 •••• 
t·· 

34 
SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI 
1. The Committee feels that the issues mentioned in paras SF 2.3 and 2.4 need 
immediate attention in order to provide satisfactory medical care to the patients. 
2. The Medical superintendent suggested that the reserved category n:Jrses candidates 
may be given an offer of provisional appointment without holding any formal interview. 
They can be regulari55ed after they have served satisfactorily for some time. In view of 
shortage of nurses in the hospital, the Committee feels that this suggestion may be 
considered by the Ministry for implementation. (SF 3.1) 
3. The Committee emphasises the need to improve the situation at the earliest by (a) 
providing more posts in Group C and D and (b) opening avenues of promotion for those 
stagnating for more than ten years in one scale. The Committee desires that all-out efforts 
be mad~ to fill up the vacant posts, in all categories, by taking suitable measures. (SF 3.2) 
/ 
4";.' The Committee feels anguished that such an essential facility like Blood Bank has -
been · suspended and no adequate efforts appyar "to have been made to revive it. The 
Committee, therefore stron_gly recommends that steps be taken to correct the deficiencies 
pointed out, in order to restore the recognition of the Blood Bank without any further 
delay. (SF 3.3) · 
5. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for strengthening the Cardiology 
Department by providing adequate facilities and essential equipments. The Committee 
recommends that a C_ath Lab shoul d also be provided. (SF 4) 
6. There is acute shortage of residential accommodation and hostels in the hospital for 
doctors as well as para-medical staff and nurses. The Committee is alarmed to see the poor 
satisfaction level in the case of employees of all categories. The Committee feels that this is 
a genuine problem which needs to be looked into by the Department of Health, in 
consultation with the Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment. (SF 5) 
7. By providing adequate number of dwelling units to the Resident Doctors, the 
Committee feels, the quality of patient care should certainly improve. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that a multi-storyed hostel type accommodation for Resident Doctors 
and Nurses be constructed at the earliest in the campus of the hospital for which necessary 
funds be provided. (SF 5.1) · 
8. The Committee recomm ends tha t the Department of Health should take up the 
matter for getting the barracks transferred to the hospital so that multi-storeyed buildings 
could be constructed in a phased manner after demolishing them. The multi-storeyed 
buildings could house all superspeciality departments, Gyane OT, the CGHS Wing, Library, 
Auditorium etc. {SF 6) . 
9. The Committee also feels that the suggestion of upgrading the Burns and Plastics 
Department to the level of an Institute should be considered by the Department of Health 
for implementation. The Hospital may, in the meantime, submit a detailed proposal to the 
Department of Health in this regard. The Comm ittee, at the same time, feels that the 
functioning of the Department , at present, leaves much to be desired and suggests 
immediate steps to be taken to improve the state of affairs as recommend ed by the 
Comm ittee. (SF 7) 
10. The Comm ittee understands that the Department of Orthopaedics of the hospital 
had been accorded the status of a National Institute, for which the funds and land were also 
:··· . ... · ... ,, ;. ~··.: ~:.:>' ~:· ·~:~~ -:;?--:: .. ~·~~· ;;_:- .. , 
. ... ··-. 
. .. .. ·:. . . 
o: ~ ::~ 
r=~"·~-
,._.\ 
f k~t~ 
l~~ 
~:;~?-
~.: . . 
•"': ". 

35 
allotted. The Committ ee came t o know that no progress has been made in this respect 
and it appears that the proposal has been put into cold stor age. While the Comm ittee 
is not aware .of the reasons for this, f eels that the prop osal n eeds to be revived and 
completed as early as possible. (SF 7A) 
11. The Committee feels that the allocation of funds for the current year needs to 
be enhanced suitably at an appropriate stage . While doing so, need of the Hospital for 
constructing residential ·accommodation, replacing old equipm~nts and improving other 
facilities should be kept in mind. (SF 8) 
DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL, NEW DELID 
1. The Committee feels that the NDMC plot adjacent to OPD/Casualty of the 
Hospital, could be useful keeping in view the acute shortage of space in the hospital. 
The Committee therefore, recommends that the Department should take up the matter 
and make all-out efforts to acquire the land for the use of the Hospital. (RML 3) 
2. The Committee feels that the Department should take up the matter with the 
President 's Secretariat and the Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment to get 
possession of Lower Hasting Square for improving hospital services. (RML 4) 
3. The Committee feels that the position of residential accommodation in the 
hospital is very poor which needs to be improved urgently by providing sufficient 
number of houses from the General Pool of different categories in the nearby 
Government colonies. The possibility of earmarking some flats in the multi-storyed 
building being constructed opposite the Casualty Wing of the hospital for senior doctors 
should also be taken up with the concerned Ministry so that. their services are readily 
available, whenever required , at short notice. (RML 5.2 and 5.3) 
4. The Committee emphasises the need for upgrading the Burns and Plastics Ward 
as the burn patients are highly prone to infections . (RML 6) 
5. The upkeep and maintenance of Neurology Ward, the Committee feels, require 
attention. (RML 7) 
6. Following services, the Committee feels, if augmented by providing desired 
inputs, would go a long way in further improving the patient care. These services are: 
(i) Neurosurgical Services 
(ii) Nursing Home Serr ices 
(iii) Organised Emergency Services 
(iv) Cardiology Services 
(v) Hyperbaric Oxygen Chamber (RML 8) 
7. In view of the urgent requirements of the hospital for providing new services 
and strengthening the existing ones and also for running special services mentioned in 
para RML 9.1, the Committee is of the opinion tha~ the amount provided would hardly 
be suTficient. lt, therefore, recommends that more amount should be provided to this 
hospital at t~e appropriate stage. (RML 9.1) 
LADY HARDINGE MEDICAL COLLEGE AND ASSOCIATED HOSPITALS 
1. The Committee was distressed to see the OTs of General Surgery and 
Orth opaedics, Eye and E.N.T. are combined. The Committee is of the view that 
opening of separate OTs is the need of the hour in view of fact that a large number. of 
patients are reporting for operations in these area . The Committee, therefore, suggests 
. -: .... 
. ·· ·. 

36 
that steps should be taken to separate the OTs and adequate staff may be provided for the 
purpose. (LH 3) 
I 
2. The Committee was told that projects pertaining to provlSlon of an Accident 
Emergency and Cancer Centre in the hospital' are pending with the Ministry. The 
Committee recommends that these proposals should be cleared expeditiously. (LH 4) 
' 3. The Committee was astonished to Jearn that the Casualty of ·the hospital was being 
run by Junior Residents since 1992 and had no regular staff. 
The Committee feels that there should not be any restriction in admission to any of 
the wards of the hospital due to shortage of staff/doctors. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that all vacancies in the hospital should be filled up at the earliest and 
wherever there is ·-a need to provide more posts of Senior/Junior Residents, these should 
be created immediately. (LH 5 and 5.1) . 
4. The Committee recommends that more posts should be created in Groups 'C' and 
'D' so that employees of this categories are put at par with their counterparts in other 
hospitals. (LH 5.2) 
5. The Committee feels that grievances of the faculty members in respect of their pay 
scales and promotions, as mentioned in para LH 5.3, appear to be genuine and is of the 
opinion that the Department should take steps to remove anomalies ·in their pay scale and 
the service rendered by CHS teaching sub-cadre before 1-1-1983 should be considered for 
promotion purposes, (LH 5.4) 
6. The Committee feels that enough security/sanitary staff be provided to the hospital 
at the earliest. (LH 6) 
7. The Committee feels that since the renovation cost of the old buildings will be 
much higher, there is need for construction of multi-storeyed buildings by demolishing the 
existing dilapidated structures in a phased manner. (LH 7) 
8. The Committee urges the Department to make available sufficient funds to 
construct an accident Emergency Block; Operation Theatre Block; Central Sterilization 
Department; Radiotherapy-Cr Scan Unit; and Maternity Centre at the earliest. (LH 7.1 
and 7.2) ,f 
9. The Committee feels that there is a need 
hospital especially record keeping in .the OPD's 
undertaken soon. (LH 8) 
to computerise certain services in the 
and suggests that computerisation be 
10. The Committee recommends that the posts of OT Technicians should be created 
and filed up at the earliest. (LH 9) · 
11. The Committee feels the necessity of strengthening the existing facilities in the 
delivery room and recommends that more obstetrics tables and beds,· with adequate staff, 
should be provided. (LH 10) ': .. 
12. The Committee recommends that the services/equipments mentioned in para LH 
11 should be provided to the hospital so as to make it a premier institution for paediatric 
care in the .country. (LH 11 and 11.1) 
13. The Committee fails to understand the reasons for denial of accommodation to the 
hospital from the General Pool which, the Committee was informed, was being given to 
employees of other hospitals. It feels that a policy decision in this regard must be taken at 
........ · ·-:.·--.-·· 

37 
the earliest and some qu arters be provided from the General Pool in the nearby areas.(LH 
12) 
14. The Committee feels that the old bungalows, which are presently in the campus, 
should be repl aced by multi-storeyed residential flats and hostels so that more 
accommodation could be provided. (LH 12.1) 
15. The Committee was informed by the Medical Superintendent that the hospital lacks 
in modern equipments for treating patients and since the hospital is attached to the college, 
it requires more funds, the Committee agrees with this plea and feels that the hospital 
should be given more funds for creating more facilities and improving the existing ones in 
the hospital. (LH 13) 
16. The Committee found that the LHMC today is in a very bad shape with no state-of­
the-art equipment and other facilities. This pioneer institution appears to have been 
relegated to the last place in terms of facilities and equipments, as compared to the other 
medical colleges in the city. In view of the past performance of the Lady Hardinge Medical 
College and also it being the only institution for training women doctors and nurses, the 
Committee would like to put forth the following suggestions for the active consideration of 
the Department so as to restore the past glory of the college: 
(i) Designate Lady Hardinge Medical College for Women as an Institute of National 
Imp ortance. 
(ii) Support development of highly specialised health care services for women and 
children which would also be the national training and research centre in 
Obstetrics-Gynaecology and Paediatrics. 
(iii) Allocate national level research schemes and projects to the Institute. 
(iv) Permit affiliation with well-established medical college in the developed countries . 
(LH 14 and 14.1) 
.• .. · 
!". !"·" ..... 
.: ._::::· . : 
... ·.:· .. :~>:· 
I , ;• 
..... ,._ . .--··;~·;·: ,-.·. •·. :·::::,·:::·. --· ~--~.-···'·-: :=·" -~:: .. . ··-~;·:.:··~.=· ,· -; -~ ._,. _;~:,· ~- ; ·':_?:.:_:~>;~o:::·:,w~r /},·;~ ~-~.-c; 
.. 

-~ 
MINUTES 
.·.-. .-·.-
..... -.··:----····.: . 
.. ; 

I 
FffiST MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. and again at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 
9th August, 1996 in Committee Room '63', First Floor, Parliament House, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT MEMBERS 
1. Shri S.B. Chavan - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
3. Dr. M. Aram 
4. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik 
5. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
6. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma 
7. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
8. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray 
9. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri D au Dayal Joshi 
11. Shri Sartaj Singh 
12. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
13. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh 
14. Chaudhary Paragi Lal 
15. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda 
16. Shri 1.0. Sanadi 
17. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose 
18. Shri Samik Lahiri 
19. Shri S.K. Karvendhan 
20. Shri Mukhtar Anees 
21. Dr. M. Jagannath 
22. Dr. Bali Ram 
23. Shri Ranen Barman 
24. Shri Surender Singh 
WITNESSES 
I. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department of Health 
1. Shri P.P. Chouhan, Secretary 
2. Shri P.S. Bhatnagar, Additional Secretary 
3. Shrimati Shailja Chandra, Additional Secretary 
41 
· .. · 
. . 
. 
J .... ~ .. 
·' .. " 
!·:· . .-.. ::.. ,. :·: :.: 
!
::;.>· ... 
• ... : 
t ... . . 
I .. · • ... . • . 
~ · ... 
l :' ..:" 
...... '"' ,- .... 

42 
4. Shrimati Rita Menon, Joint Secretary 
5. Shrimati Renu Sahni Dhar, -do-
6. Shrimati Sunita Basant, -do-
7. Shrimati S. Kaila, CCA 
8. Dr. G. Y. Satyawati, Director-General, ICMR 
9. Dr. Narendra Bihari, DGHS 
10. Dr. S.P. Agarwal, M.D. R.M.L. Hospital 
11. Dr. Shiv Lal, Director, NMEP 
12. Dr. G. Ramdas, M.S., Safdarjung Hospital 
13. Dr. P. Dasgupta, Drugs Controller of India 
14. Dr. R.C. Sharma, Additional D.G. 
15. Dr. Sharma, DireCtor, PGI 
16. Dr. K.K. Dutta, Director, NICD 
17. Dr. Bhutani, Director, AIIMS 
18. Dr. A.K. Kundu, DDG 
19. Dr. G.L. Khatri, DDG 
20. Shri Bhandari, Financial Advisor 
II. • 
III. • 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director 
· Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary 
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer 
• • 
• 
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses of the 
Departments of Health, Family Welfare and Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy 
in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants for the year 1996-97. 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.35 P.M. to meet again at 10.00 A.M. on 
lOth August, 1996. 
•••Relate to other matters. 
;/> 
i};~~ .. 
n·::> 
·.:_:. 
k I 
~tif. 
~ ~ 
!f11 
)~~j 
~ff 
~r t.{~···~--
j· . :_· :·: 
t;· ::.,:::: r :::· . ..:-=. .. 
)":_::'} 
[ ·{·.·._; 
:;.;:;y;; o,:T;;::ywprJ~;!if!i(7: ,. ;-;;>; ;tf; 'H;it.<'f8i':~'J er '~;::qy;:, '''"" :,:~Wii}i :.>::>[;' :7.; :(:;;:;gr:: ;y;;v;;:;; :;J~~(t 
. . .. . . . ·.·. : 

v 
•FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Saturday, the 24th August, 1996 in 
Committee Room 'A ', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT MEMBERS 
1. Shri S.B. Chavan - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
3. Dr. B.B. Dutta 
4. Dr. M. Aram 
5. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik 
6. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma 
7. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray 
8. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
11. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
12. Dr. .. Ram Lakhan Singh 
13. Shri S.K. Karvendh an 
14. Dr. M. Jagannath 
15. Dr. Bali Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary 
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on the Demands for Grants 
for 1996-97 of the Departments of Health (Demand No. 39), Culture (Demand No. 
49), Family Welfare (Demand No. 41) and Indian Systems of Medicine and 
Homoeopathy (Demand No .. !fO). The Committee; after some discussions, .adopted 
the same with some modifications. 
3. The Committee authori sed its Chairman 'and in his absence Dr. (Smt.) 
Bharati Ray and Dr. M. Aram to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri 
Mahadeepak Singh Shakya and in his absence Shri S.K. Karvendhan to lay the 
reports in the Lok Sabha. The Committee decided that the reports may be laid/ 
presented on 29.8.96 or on a subsequent day subject to availability of Hindi 
version. 
4 . • * 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 P.M. 
·~linu tc~ oi il . Jll & !Yth meeti ngs relat es to matters not included in this report. 
• • • R datc ~ to oth:.-r matt er. 
..t3 
* 
r: .. . 
i: r ·, .. ···-
1':.:-
I : . . · · 
,· ... . : .'' :: ... ·. :~ . .. 