 
 
       STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, 
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024-2025) 
 
 
     
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty Eighth Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
the subject ‘Functioning of Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority 
(WDRA)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution)} 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
          December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
2 


 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024-2025) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
{Action Taken  by  the   Government  on  the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty Eighth Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  on 
the subject ‘Functioning of Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority 
(WDRA)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution)} 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 2 December, 2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 2 December, 2024 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
          December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Composition of the Committee 
 
iii 
Introduction 
 
iv 
Chapter I Report 
 
1 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by Government 
 
8 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government replies 
 
15 
Chapter IV Observation/Recommendation which have not been 
accepted by Government 
 
16 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of Government are still awaited 
 
17 
ANNEXURE 
A State-wise SWC registered warehouses as on 
14.03.2024 
 
20 
B DO letters issued to Punjab, Gujarat and Meghalaya 
SWCs for WDRA registrations under the new 
relaxations 
21 
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Committee (2024-
25) held on 28 November, 2024 
 
42 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Thirty Eighth Report of the Standing Committee  on 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
44 
 
  

 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (2024-25) 
 
                   Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi   -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Anto Antony  3.  Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay  4.  Shri Jaswantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  5.  Smt. Malvika Devi  6.  Shri Manish Jaiswal  7.  Shri Saumitra Khan  8.  Shri Manoj Kumar  9.  Shri Sunil Kumar  10. Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah  11. Shri Ajendra Singh Lodhi  12. Shri Neeraj Maurya  13. Shri Bastipati Nagaraju  14. Shri Haribhai Patel  15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  16. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu  17. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh  18. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh  19. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane  20. Dr. Indra Hang Subba  21. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan   
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
24. Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
25. Shri Baburam Nishad 
26. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Vacant 
29. Vacant  
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                      -           Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi            -  Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                     -  Deputy Secretary 
 
(iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (2024-2025) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Second Report on Action Taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Eighth Report of the 
Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Functioning of Warehousing 
Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA)’ of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
2.   The Thirty Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 19.12.2023. The Government has furnished its replies indicating Action Taken on the 
recommendations contained in the Report on 19.03.2024. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
28th November, 2024. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                        Kanimozhi Karunanidhi, 
 28 November, 2024                    Chairperson, 
 07 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                                 Standing Committee on  
    Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
(iv) 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Eighth Report of the 
Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Functioning of Warehousing 
Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA)’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution). 
1.2 The Thirty Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 19.12.2023. It contained                                                       
10 observations/recommendations. Action taken replies in respect of all the               
10 observations/recommendations contained in the Report have been received 
and these have been categorized as follows: 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
Government: 
   Para Nos. : 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 & 9    
   (Chapter – II, Total: 08) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies: 
              Para No.: Nil 
(Chapter – III, Total: 0) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
              Para No.:  Nil  
 (Chapter – IV, Total: 0) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited:  
    Para No. : 3 &10 
 (Chapter – V, Total: 02) 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations accepted by the Government. The 
Committee desire that final action taken notes to the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final replies in 
respect of recommendation contained in Chapter V for which only interim 
reply has been given by the Government, should be furnished to the 
Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 
A. Registration of Warehouses 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 16) 
1.5 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee learn that Warehousing Development and Regulatory 
Authority (WDRA) was constituted on 26th October 2010, as per the 
provisions of Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Act, 2007. One 
of the main objective of WDRA is Licensing and Monitoring of 
Warehouses as per the provisions of Warehousing (Development & 
Regulation) Act 2007 & Warehousing (Development & Regulation) 
Registration of Warehouses Rules, 2017. The Committee note that since 
inception, the WDRA has registered 6929 warehouses with storage 
capacity of 411 Lakh MT, out of which the valid warehouse registration 
number is 4916 with storage capacity of 363 Lakh MT as on 30.11.2023. 
Further, the Committee are happy to note that during FY 2022-23,       
1522 warehouses were registered in comparison to 610 registration during 
FY 2021-22 expressing 150% growth in registration of warehouses than 
the previous financial year i.e 2021-22. They note with satisfaction that so 
far, 1151 warehouses have been registered during current financial year. 
The Committee firmly believe that the Department and WDRA will put forth 
their dedicated efforts towards increasing the number of registration of 
warehouses which will eventually help in developing a progressive 
ecosystem for warehousing in the country. They further, recommend that if 
need be, possibility of opening regional offices of WDRA be explored as it 
would not only enhance coordination with state warehousing corporations, 
but also provide platform for clear understanding of the work of WDRA 
and ensure better outreach.” 
1.6 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“It is submitted that, as per the recommendation of the Committee, WDRA 
will earnestly work towards creating a conducive ecosystem for increasing 
number of registered warehouses.  
Further, WDRA is conducting a study “Organisation Study of WDRA” 
through National Productivity Council. The study will help in identifying 

3 
 
locations for regional offices and manpower requirement. A draft report 
from NPC has been received and is under examination. In the draft report 
NPC has suggested the creation of Regional Offices.” 
 
1.7 The Committee had expressed their belief in the Department and 
WDRA for increasing the number of registration of warehouses through 
their dedicated efforts and recommended to explore the possibility of 
opening regional offices of WDRA in order to enhance coordination with 
state warehousing corporations and ensure better outreach.  The 
Department in their Action Taken Reply has stated that WDRA will 
earnestly work towards creating a conducive ecosystem for increasing 
number of registered warehouses. The Department has also stated that 
WDRA is conducting a study “Organisation Study of WDRA” through 
National Productivity Council which will help in identifying locations for 
regional offices and manpower requirement. A draft report presented by 
NPC has also suggested the creation of Regional Offices. The Committee, 
therefore, desire to be apprised of the outcome of the examination of the 
report submitted by NPC on organisation study of WDRA and hope and 
trust thereby that through creation of Regional Offices of WDRA, efforts 
being made by Department/WDRA would speed up the registration of 
warehouses. 
 
B. Registration of SWC’s Warehouses 
 Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 21) 
 
1.8 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee observe that as on 30.11.2023 there are                    
1244 warehouses of 15 State Warehousing Corporations registered under 
WDRA provisions. They further informed that it is essential to increase the 
number of warehouses under the ambit of WDRA’s regulation, to extend 
the benefits of regulation to a larger number of people. Moreover, Food 
Corporation of India has decided to insist on WDRA registration for all 
third-party warehouses used for storing publicly procured stocks and 
similar orders have been issued by MPWLC. The Committee are satisfied 
to note that WDRA themselves are self conscious regarding expansion of 
registered warehouses and making efforts by running outreach programs 
for warehousemen. The Committee feel that bringing all warehouse 
holding organizations on a single platform will help in developing a 
homogenous warehousing niche in the country. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that WDRA should reach out all the State Warehousing 

4 
 
Corporations and pursue them for registering and apprise the Committee 
accordingly.” 
1.9 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“It is submitted that DFPD and WDRA have already reached out to all 
SWCs and multiple meetings were held with SWCs.  WDRA will continue 
to reach out to remaining SWCs to register.  
SWCs warehouses registered with WDRA as on 14.03.2024 is enclosed 
as Annexure-A. 
It is also informed that some SWC warehouses could not be registered as 
they did not meet WDRA’s standards.”  
1.10 The Committee had felt the need of bringing all warehouse holding 
organisation on a single platform to develop a homogenous warehousing 
niche in the country.  They had also desired that WDRA should reach out 
all the State Warehousing Corporations and pursue them for registering. 
The Department in their action taken reply has stated that DFPD and WDRA 
have already reached out to all SWCs and multiple meetings were held with 
SWCs. 1275 warehouses of 16 State Warehousing Corporations registered 
under WDRA as on 14.03.2024 and WDRA will continue to reach out to 
remaining SWCs to register. While stressing on the need to develop a 
homogenous warehousing niche in the country, the Committee again urge 
the Department and WDRA to complete the process and reach out to 
remaining SWCs to register their warehouses with WDRA and apprise the 
Committee accordingly.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 22) 
1.11 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that warehouses of Kerala, Gujarat, Meghalaya and 
Punjab State Warehousing Corporations are not registered with WDRA. 
The reason stated by WDRA is that WDRA registers only those 
warehouseman and warehouses which meet the standards prescribed by 
WDRA. A warehouseman has to have minimum net worth prescribed in 
the WDRA warehouse registration Rules. SWCs of Kerala and Punjab do 
not have required networth for registering its warehouses. In this regard, 
the Committee are delighted to note that from, 12-07-2023, Govt. of India, 
has allowed entities created under either central and state legislations to 
register warehouses even with negative networth provided those entities 
give an indemnity bond from the respective governments. Kerala and 
Punjab SWCs have been informed about this amendment and advised to 
register with WDRA. Kerala SWC has applied for registration and Gujarat 

5 
 
along with Meghalaya SWCs have been advised by the DFPD and WDRA 
to register. While appreciating the considered efforts of the Government to 
bring all State Warehousing Corporation under the ambit of WDRA 
registration, the Committee desire that the registration of Kerala SWC 
should be expedited and Department and WDRA both should pursue 
Punjab, Gujarat and Meghalaya SWCs to apply for WDRA registrations 
under the new relaxations.” 
 
1.12 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“We have got an indemnity bond from Kerala signed by MD, KSWC. It is 
being examined whether this will suffice.  
 
DO letters have been again issued to Punjab, Gujarat and Meghalaya 
SWCs. The same are enclosed as Annexure-B.”  
  
1.13 The Committee had desired that the registration of Kerala SWC 
should be expedited and Department and WDRA both should pursue 
Punjab, Gujarat and Meghalaya SWCs to apply for WDRA registrations 
under the new relaxations. The Department in their Action Taken Reply has 
stated that an indemnity bond from Kerala signed by MD, KSWC is being 
examined whether this will suffice and DO letters have been again issued 
to Punjab, Gujarat and Meghalaya SWCs.  The Committee, while reiterating 
their original recommendation desire the Department and WDRA to 
expedite and complete the process of registration of Kerala SWC and  
persuade the Punjab, Gujarat and Meghalaya SWCs to apply for WDRA 
registrations under the new relaxations in a time bound manner and 
apprise the Committee accordingly. 
 
 
C. Publicity/Awareness/Training Programs 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 66) 
1.14 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that WDRA organizes various awareness 
programmes for farmers through expert institutes to create awareness 
among farmers about the benefits of the negotiable warehouse receipt 
system and scientific storage. During 2022-23, 258 awareness 
programmes were conducted in comparison to 177 programmes in     
2021-22. Further, during 2022-23,17 capacity building programs were 
organized by WDRA for registered warehouses focusing on equipping the 
warehousemen with required knowledge and skills for professional 

6 
 
management of warehouses through which total 715 warehouse 
personnel were trained. Besides, WDRA has taken up vigorous outreach 
activities in different parts of the country with all stakeholders including 
banks, warehouse owners and depositors through conferences, seminars 
and workshops. In addition, Publicity campaigns were run in February to 
March, 2023 and August to November, 2023 on Doordarshan and Videos 
in 11 languages have been uploaded on You Tube. The Committee are 
pleased to know that WDRA has been focusing on increasing their 
outreach through multiple means. They desire that WDRA should take the 
lead in organizing more training and awareness programmes throughout 
the country. The Committee recommend the WDRA to formulate 
regional/state committees to analyze the need of such programmes at 
regional level and prepare a yearly plan for a rigourous outreach 
programme involving local bodies, Gram panchayats etc. so that the 
benefits of e-NWRs and practices of safe scientific storage practices 
would touch all corners of the country. In this endeavour, involvement of 
people’s representatives can also be explored at all levels by WDRA.” 
1.15 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“WDRA has constantly been endeavoring to conduct training and outreach 
programs across the country. The modality of the training programs is also 
being constantly reviewed to ensure optimum effectiveness for the 
stakeholders. Recently changes have been made in ATP and WTP in 
terms of syllabus and duration.  
As regards formulation of regional/state committees to analyze the need of 
such programmes, the matter would be examined and appropriate action 
will be taken.” 
1.16 The Committee had noted that WDRA had organized various 
awareness programmes through expert institutes to create awareness 
among farmers about the benefits of the negotiable warehouse receipt 
system and scientific storage. In this regard, the Committee had desired 
that WDRA should organize more training and awareness programmes 
throughout the country and also recommended the WDRA to formulate 
regional/state committees to analyze the need of awareness programmes at 
regional level. The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated that 
WDRA has constantly been endeavoring to conduct training and outreach 
programs across the country. The Department has further stated that in 
regard to formulation of regional/state committees to analyze the need of 
such programmes, the matter would be examined and appropriate action 
will be taken. The Committee, while reiterating their original 
recommendation stress upon the constitution of regional/state committees 
by WDRA to develop awareness programmes at regional level and a yearly 

7 
 
plan/ draft yearly  outreach programme involving local bodies, Gram 
panchayats etc. so that the benefits of e-NWRs and practices of safe 
scientific storage practices would touch all corners of the country. The 
Committee may be apprised of the concrete action taken in this direction. 
 
  

8 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
  ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 16) 
 
 The Committee learn that Warehousing Development and Regulatory 
Authority (WDRA) was constituted on 26th October 2010, as per the provisions of 
Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Act, 2007. One of the main 
objective of WDRA is Licensing and Monitoring of Warehouses as per the 
provisions of Warehousing (Development & Regulation) Act 2007 & Warehousing 
(Development & Regulation) Registration of Warehouses Rules, 2017. The 
Committee note that since inception, the WDRA has registered 6929 warehouses 
with storage capacity of 411 Lakh MT, out of which the valid warehouse 
registration number is 4916 with storage capacity of 363 Lakh MT as on 
30.11.2023. Further, the Committee are happy to note that during                      
FY 2022-23, 1522 warehouses were registered in comparison to 610 registration 
during FY 2021-22 expressing 150% growth in registration of warehouses than 
the previous financial year i.e 2021-22. They note with satisfaction that so far, 
1151 warehouses have been registered during current financial year. The 
Committee firmly believe that the Department and WDRA will put forth their 
dedicated efforts towards increasing the number of registration of warehouses 
which will eventually help in developing a progressive ecosystem for 
warehousing in the country. They further, recommend that if need be, possibility 
of opening regional offices of WDRA be explored as it would not only enhance 
coordination with state warehousing corporations, but also provide platform for 
clear understanding of the work of WDRA and ensure better outreach. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 It is submitted that, as per the recommendation of the Committee, WDRA 
will earnestly work towards creating a conducive ecosystem for increasing 
number of registered warehouses.  
Further, WDRA is conducting a study “Organisation Study of WDRA” 
through National Productivity Council. The study will help in identifying locations 
for regional offices and manpower requirement. A draft report from NPC has 
been received and is under examination. In the draft report NPC has suggested 
the creation of Regional Offices.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
O.M. No. A-42/3/2022-A and F/3134 Dated the 19th March, 2024] 
 

9 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No.21) 
2.3 The Committee observe that as on 30.11.2023 there are 1244 
warehouses of 15 State Warehousing Corporations registered under WDRA 
provisions. They further informed that it is essential to increase the number of 
warehouses under the ambit of WDRA’s regulation, to extend the benefits of 
regulation to a larger number of people. Moreover, Food Corporation of India has 
decided to insist on WDRA registration for all third-party warehouses used for 
storing publicly procured stocks and similar orders have been issued by MPWLC. 
The Committee are satisfied to note that WDRA themselves are self conscious 
regarding expansion of registered warehouses and making efforts by running 
outreach programs for warehousemen. The Committee feel that bringing all 
warehouse holding organizations on a single platform will help in developing a 
homogenous warehousing niche in the country. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that WDRA should reach out all the State Warehousing Corporations and pursue 
them for registering and apprise the Committee accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 It is submitted that DFPD and WDRA have already reached out to all 
SWCs and multiple meetings were held with SWCs.  WDRA will continue to 
reach out to remaining SWCs to register.  
SWCs warehouses registered with WDRA as on 14.03.2024 is enclosed 
as Annexure-A. 
It is also informed that some SWC warehouses could not be registered as 
they did not meet WDRA’s standards.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
O.M. No. A-42/3/2022-A and F/3134 Dated the 19th March, 2024] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 

10 
 
Recommendation No. 4 (Para No.27) 
 
2.5  The Committee note that application fee for registration and renewal of 
warehouse storing agricultural goods varies from Rs. 5,000/- to Rs. 30,000/- and 
warehouses storing both agricultural and non-agricultural goods or                 
non-agricultural goods only varies from Rs.50,000/- to Rs.100,000/- depending 
on the capacity of the warehouse. Further, the application fee for warehouses 
where the applicant/warehousemen is a Farmer Producer Organisation or a 
Primary Agricultural Co-operative Society or Self Help Group (SHG), has been 
fixed at Rs. 500 per warehouse. The Committee understand that fee payable for 
registration play a vital role in registration and renewal of warehouses with 
WDRA and thus appreciate the specific steps like keeping small application fee 
for an applicant/warehousemen being Farmer Producer Organisation or a 
Primary Agricultural Co-operative Society or Self Help Group (SHG) and all 
applicants have been waived both for registration or renewal of warehouses 
storing only agricultural goods till 25th Oct, 2025 to encourage more registration. 
The Committee expect that WDRA will continue their support to such applicants 
in future as well and also consider the similar waiver scheme for the warehouses 
storing both agricultural and non-agricultural or non-agricultural goods so that 
more and more warehouses are registered with WDRA. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.6 With the intention to lower entry barriers for WHM of all types of entities, 
the registration and renewal fees for warehouses were waived by the 
Government. However, the financial conditions of the stakeholders involved in 
the non-agri commodity business are not the same as those involved in agri 
commodity business. As the depositors of the non-agri commodities are mainly 
traders who have strong economic footing, there does not seem to be a need for 
waiving fees with respect to warehouses storing non-agri commodities. However, 
the issue will be considered based on facts on ground and an appropriate 
decision will be taken following all rules and procedures.  
As regards warehouses storing agri commodities, the extension of the fee 
waiver provisions would be revisited at the appropriate time. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
O.M. No. A-42/3/2022-A and F/3134 Dated the 19th March, 2024] 
 
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No.36) 
 
2.7 The Committee note that under Section 2 of the Warehousing 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 2007, a Warehouse Receipt has been 
defined as an acknowledgement in writing or in electronic form issued by a 
Warehouseman or his duly authorised representative (including depository by 

11 
 
whatever name called) of the receipt for storage of goods not owned by the 
warehouseman. As per Section 11 of the Act a warehouse receipt can either be 
in writing or in electronic form. One of the objectives of WDRA is implementation 
of e-NWR (Electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receipts) in India as per the 
provisions of Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (Electronic 
Negotiable Warehouse Receipts) Regulations, 2017. Accordingly, the Authority 
launched electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receipt (e-NWR) on 26th September, 
2017 to be issued by registered warehouses on electronic repository system. The 
Committee are delighted to note that all NWRs issued by registered warehouses 
are only e-NWRs with effect from 1st August 2019. While appreciating the 
progressive steps taken by WDRA in bring the eNWR in place and considering 
the advantages of eNWR over physical receipts, the Committee desire that 
benefits of eNWR should be popularized more among warehousemen and 
outreach of the same may be expanded.  
Reply of the Government 
2.8 WDRA is grateful for the appreciation of the Hon’ble Committee regarding 
the decision that all NWRs issued by registered warehouses are only e-NWRs 
with effect from 1st August 2019. WDRA is organizing Farmer Awareness 
Programs (FAPs) and Warehouseman Training Programs (WTPs), where the 
benefits of e-NWRs are also disseminated among the participants. In the 
programs warehouseman is also invited to take part. Further, WDRA also 
conducts outreach programs with warehouseman and other stakeholders. WDRA 
has also decided to conduct state level outreach programs in coordination with 
NABARD. As recommended by the committee, efforts will be made to include a 
greater number of warehousemen.   
Farmers Awareness Programmes and Warehousemen Training 
Programmes conducted in this F.Y. are as below: 
S.No Name of the Program No of Programs 
conducted in FY 2023-
24 ( w.e.f 1 April, 23 till 
29.02.2024) 
No of 
participants 
benefitted  
1 Farmers Awareness 
Program (FAP) 
221 11219 
2 Warehousemen 
Training Program 
(WTP)  
13 352 
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
O.M. No. A-42/3/2022-A and F/3134 Dated the 19th March, 2024] 
 
 
 

12 
 
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No.39) 
 
2.9 The Committee observe that it is envisaged in the objectives of the 
Warehousing (D&R) Act 2007, WDRA is aimed to “facilitate finance against 
NWRs”, “improving liquidity in rural areas”, “improving lending portfolio of banks”. 
The Committee appreciate the efforts of WDRA in this directions as they have 
approached RBI several times to make eNWR mandatory for pledge financing, or 
at least give preferential treatment to eNWR based loans. The Committee 
acknowledge the fact that it is the result of persuasion of WDRA with RBI that 
despite declining the request for preferential treatment to eNWRs on the ground 
of low number of registered warehouses, RBI has enhanced Priority Sector 
Lending (PSL) limit for e-NWRs from Rs. 50 Lakhs to Rs. 75 Lakhs. The 
Committee also desire that WDRA should keep on pursuing RBI for making 
preferential treatment to eNWR once the number of registered warehouses 
increase and the effect of preferential treatment of eNWR would further 
enhanced the number of registered warehouses. The Committee would be 
interested in knowing the impact of these developments in achieving the 
objectives of the Warehousing (D&R) Act, 2007. 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 WDRA gratefully acknowledge the appreciation of the Committee on our 
attempts to approach RBI to make eNWR mandatory or at least preferential for 
loan against Agri produce.   
It is submitted, that, as per the recommendation of the Committee, WDRA 
will take up the matter again with RBI for getting preferential treatment.  
With regards to impact in achieving the objectives of W (D&R) Act, 2007, it 
is submitted, that as on 29.02.2024, the number of WDRA registered 
warehouses stands at 5634 and the progressive figure of pledge finance stands 
at Rs 10161 Crores. Besides, 82735 number of farmers/warehouseman have got 
awareness about importance of scientific warehousing & e-NWR eco system and 
4196 number of warehouseman have been trained through WTP programs. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
O.M. No. A-42/3/2022-A and F/3134 Dated the 19th March, 2024] 
 
Recommendation No. 7 (Para No. 40) 
 
2.11 The Committee are also happy to note WDRA is directly approaching 
banks to increase their post-harvest lending against eNWRs and initiated the 
dialogue with both public and private sector banks to improve pledge finance 
against eNWRs. As a result, the State Bank of India has brought out a special 
product for loaning against eNWR with low interest rate, zero processing fees 
and no additional collateral. While appreciating the efforts of WDRA in the 

13 
 
direction of promoting eNWR for getting preferential treatment, the Committee 
recommend that WDRA should keep on exploring other avenues for promotion of 
eNWR.  
Reply of the Government 
2.12 WDRA gratefully acknowledge the appreciation of the Committee for 
WDRA’s efforts to promote eNWR and pledge finance against it. Such remarks 
are deeply encouraging and will motivate WDRA to make enhanced efforts.  
 
It is submitted that WDRA will work closely with various stakeholders 
including Departments of GoI, RBI, IBA, banks, warehousemen and traders for 
promotion of e-NWRs. On 04-03-2024 , the e-Kisan Upaj Nidhi, a digital gateway, 
developed by WDRA in association with NABARD and a Task force in SBI, to 
connect e-NWR with onboarded banks  was launched . This gateway has the 
potential to play an important role in improving the ease of loaning to farmers 
from on boarded banks and forms yet another initiative for promoting e-NWR.  
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
O.M. No. A-42/3/2022-A and F/3134 Dated the 19th March, 2024] 
 
Recommendation No. 8 (Para No. 41) 
 
2.13 The Committee note that pledge finance against eNWRs has been        
Rs. 732 Cr., 1492 Cr. and 2442 Cr. for the years 2020-21, 2021-22 and 2022-23 
respectively. Further, it has reached to Rs. 2081 Cr till 30.11.2023 for the year 
2023-24. The Committee are delighted to observe the growth of pledge financing 
against eNWR for last three years and hope that loan values against eNWR will 
maintain the pace of manifold increase in future as well. They also desire that 
WDRA should also continue to put forth their earnest efforts to create an 
environment for promoting eNWR and pledge financing. 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 It is submitted that WDRA will work closely with various stakeholders 
including Departments of GoI, RBI, IBA and banks for promotion of pledge 
financing against e-NWRs. On 04-03-2024 , the e-Kisan Upaj Nidhi, a digital 
gateway, developed by WDRA in association with NABARD and a Task force in 
SBI, to connect e-NWR with onboarded banks  was launched . This gateway has 
the potential to play an important role in improving the ease of loaning  to farmers 
from on boarded banks and forms yet another initiative for  promoting e-NWR. 
We will continue to put in our earnest efforts to create an environment for 
promoting eNWR and pledge financing. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
O.M. No. A-42/3/2022-A and F/3134 Dated the 19th March, 2024] 

14 
 
 
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 43) 
 
2.15  The Committee note with satisfaction that WDRA is extending special 
relaxations to warehouses owned by Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), 
Primary Agricultural Cooperative Credit Societies (PACCSs) and Self Help 
Groups (SHGs) such as relaxation in registration requirements, minimal 
registration fees of Rs.500/- per warehouse irrespective of its capacity, positive 
net worth and security deposit of Rs.50,000/- irrespective of value of 
eNWR/eNNWR issued by warehouse. Further, some relaxations have also given 
in infrastructure requirements for registration of warehouses as minimum limit for 
capacity to be registered in case of PACSs warehouses is kept at 100 MT. The 
Committee agree that these steps taken by WDRA will not only support Farmer 
Producer Organizations (FPOs), Primary Agricultural Cooperative Credit 
Societies (PACCSs) and Self Help Groups (SHGs) but also encourage them to 
build/register their warehouses with WDRA. While appreciating the efforts made 
by WDRA in this direction, the Committee desire that WDRA should continue the 
stride of endorsing small capacity warehouses owned by FPOs, PACCSs and 
SHGs which will eventually help in developing/expanding warehousing 
ecosystem specially in the rural areas of the country. 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 WDRA is grateful for the Committee’s appreciation of its efforts to support 
FPOs, PACCS, SHGs to register their warehouses with WDRA. It may be added 
that as on date registration and renewal fee for all warehouses including FPOs, 
PACCSs and SHGs have been waived. WDRA is in touch with Co-operative 
Departments of various State Governments to facilitate registration of PACS and 
co-operative societies. WDRA will continue the stride of assisting small capacity 
warehouses in this sector as suggested by the Committee. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
O.M. No. A-42/3/2022-A and F/3134 Dated the 19th March, 2024] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
 REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
  

16 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

17 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No.22) 
 
 The Committee note that warehouses of Kerala, Gujarat, Meghalaya and 
Punjab State Warehousing Corporations are not registered with WDRA. The 
reason stated by WDRA is that WDRA registers only those warehouseman and 
warehouses which meet the standards prescribed by WDRA. A warehouseman 
has to have minimum net worth prescribed in the WDRA warehouse registration 
Rules. SWCs of Kerala and Punjab do not have required networth for registering 
its warehouses. In this regard, the Committee are delighted to note that from,   
12-07-2023, Govt. of India, has allowed entities created under either central and 
state legislations to register warehouses even with negative networth provided 
those entities give an indemnity bond from the respective governments. Kerala 
and Punjab SWCs have been informed about this amendment and advised to 
register with WDRA. Kerala SWC has applied for registration and Gujarat along 
with Meghalaya SWCs have been advised by the DFPD and WDRA to register. 
While appreciating the considered efforts of the Government to bring all State 
Warehousing Corporation under the ambit of WDRA registration, the Committee 
desire that the registration of Kerala SWC should be expedited and Department 
and WDRA both should pursue Punjab, Gujarat and Meghalaya SWCs to apply 
for WDRA registrations under the new relaxations. 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 We have got an indemnity bond from Kerala signed by MD, KSWC. It is 
being examined whether this will suffice.  
 
DO letters have been again issued to Punjab, Gujarat and Meghalaya 
SWCs. The same are enclosed as Annexure-B.  
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
O.M. No. A-42/3/2022-A and F/3134 Dated the 19th March, 2024] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

18 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No. 66) 
 
 
5.3 The Committee note that WDRA organizes various awareness 
programmes for farmers through expert institutes to create awareness among 
farmers about the benefits of the negotiable warehouse receipt system and 
scientific storage. During 2022-23, 258 awareness programmes were conducted 
in comparison to 177 programmes in 2021-22. Further, during 2022-23,             
17 capacity building programs were organized by WDRA for registered 
warehouses focusing on equipping the warehousemen with required knowledge 
and skills for professional management of warehouses through which total 715 
warehouse personnel were trained. Besides, WDRA has taken up vigorous 
outreach activities in different parts of the country with all stakeholders including 
banks, warehouse owners and depositors through conferences, seminars and 
workshops. In addition, Publicity campaigns were run in February to March, 2023 
and August to November, 2023 on Doordarshan and Videos in 11 languages 
have been uploaded on You Tube. The Committee are pleased to know that 
WDRA has been focusing on increasing their outreach through multiple means. 
They desire that WDRA should take the lead in organizing more training and 
awareness programmes throughout the country. The Committee recommend the 
WDRA to formulate regional/state committees to analyze the need of such 
programmes at regional level and prepare a yearly plan for a rigourous outreach 
programme involving local bodies, Gram panchayats etc. so that the benefits of 
e-NWRs and practices of safe scientific storage practices would touch all corners 
of the country. In this endeavour, involvement of people’s representatives can 
also be explored at all levels by WDRA. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
5.4 WDRA has constantly been endeavoring to conduct training and outreach 
programs across the country. The modality of the training programs is also being 
constantly reviewed to ensure optimum effectiveness for the stakeholders. 
Recently changes have been made in ATP and WTP in terms of syllabus and 
duration.  
 
 
 

19 
 
 
 
As regards formulation of regional/state committees to analyze the need of 
such programmes, the matter would be examined and appropriate action will be 
taken. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
O.M. No. A-42/3/2022-A and F/3134 Dated the 19th March, 2024] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                 Kanimozhi Karunanidhi, 
 28 November, 2024                    Chairperson, 
 07 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                        Standing Committee on  
    Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 

20 
 
ANNEXURE A 
State-wise SWC registered warehouses as on 14.03.2024 
State Number of registered warehouses 
ANDHRA PRADESH 94 
ASSAM   3 
BIHAR   33  
CHHATTISGARH  137  
HARYANA  111  
JHARKHAND    10  
KARNATAKA    21  
MADHYA PRADESH  201 
MAHARASHTRA  195  
ODISHA   47 
RAJASTHAN    97 
TAMIL NADU    65 
TELANGANA    75 
UTTAR PRADESH  178 
UTTARAKHAND     6  
WEST BENGAL     2  
Grand Total  1275  
 
  

21 
 
ANNEXURE B 
 


22 
 
 


23 
 
 


24 
 
 


25 
 
 


26 
 
 


27 
 
 


28 
 
 


29 
 
 


30 
 
 
  


31 
 
 


32 
 
 
  


33 
 
 
  


34 
 
 


35 
 
 


36 
 
 


37 
 
 


38 
 
 
  


39 
 
 


40 
 
 
  


41 
 
 
 


42 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
MINUTES OF THE  FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024-2025) 
HELD ON THURSDAY,  28TH NOVEMBER, 2024 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room No. 
‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Malvika Devi  
3. Shri Manish Jaiswal  
4. Shri Manoj Kumar  
5. Shri Sunil Kumar  
6. Shri Ajendra Singh Lodhi  
7. Shri Haribhai Patel  
8. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu  
9. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh 
10. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh 
11.Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane 
12. Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
13.Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 14.Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
 15. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
 16. Shri Baburam Nishad 
 17. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
 18. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                 - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi                 - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                 - Deputy Secretary 
 

43 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft 
Reports of the Committee: 
(i) xxxx     xxxx    xxxx   xxxx  xxxx 
 
(ii) Second Report on Action Taken   by   the   Government   on the 
Observations/  Recommendations contained in the Thirty Eighth  Report 
of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Functioning of 
Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA)’ of the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food and Public Distribution); 
 
(iii) xxxx     xxxx    xxxx   xxxx  xxxx 
 
 
 
(iv) xxxx     xxxx    xxxx   xxxx  xxxx 
 
 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the above mentioned 
Draft Reports of the Committee.  
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft 
Reports without any amendments/modifications.  
5.  The Committee then authorized Hon’ble Chairperson to finalize and 
present the aforesaid Reports. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
************* 
***** Matter does not relate to the Report.  

44 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY EIGHTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-24) (SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
(i) Total number of Recommendations:        10 
  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government : 
 
Para Nos.: 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 & 9    
   
            (Chapter – II, Total 08) 
              Percentage:   80% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
Para No.: NIL 
                     (Chapter – III, Total - 0) 
             Percentage:  0.00% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 
Para No.: NIL 
            (Chapter – IV, Total - 0)   
                Percentage: 0.00% 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: 
 
Para No.: 3 &10 
 
    (Chapter – V, Total - 02) 
           Percentage : 20% 