 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-2024) 
 
 
       
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
THIRTY NINTH REPORT 
 
on 
 
Regulation of Weights and Measures with specific reference to Dispensing 
Machines at Fuel Stations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 

 
 
 
THIRTY NINTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-2024) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
 
Regulation of Weights and Measures with specific reference to Dispensing Machines 
at Fuel Stations 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07 February, 2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07 February, 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2024/ Magha 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 


 
 
INDEX 
PAGE NO. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23) (iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2023-24) (iv) 
INTRODUCTION (v) 
 REPORT  
 PART I  
I Introductory:  1 
 (i) An Overview of Department of Consumer Affairs 1 
 (ii) Legal Metrology  1 
 (iii) Attached Offices 2 
II Weights & Measures Framework 3 
 (i) Historical Background of Weights and Measures Law in India 3 
 (ii) Legal Framework 6 
 (A) Legal Metrology Act 2009 – Important provisions 8 
 (B) Rules under Legal Metrology Act 10 
 (C) The Legal Metrology Act 2009 v is a vis The Jan Vishwas 
(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2023 
14 
III Dispensing Machines at Fuel Stations 17 
 (i) An Overview 17 
 (ii) Verification, Stamping & Declaration of Dispensing Machines 23 
 (iii) Fair Practices at Fuel Stations 24 
 (iv) Specifications for Weighing & Measuring Instruments 25 
 (v) Technological Advancements and Impact 27 
 (vi) Monitoring of Fuel Stations 32 
IV Regulatory Framework for Weights & Measures 37 
 (i) Overview 37 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 (ii) Enforcement Mechanism 40 
 (iii) Penalties for non-compliance 42 
 (iv) Regulatory Authority 43 
 PART II 47 
 Recommendations/ Observations 47 
 APPENDICES  
(i) Minutes of the 17th Sitting of the Committee held on 26 July, 2023 52 
(ii) Minutes of the 6th Sitting of the Committee held on 12 December, 2023 55 
(iii) Minutes of the 8th Sitting of the Committee held on 06 February, 2024 58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (2022-23) 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
1. Mrs. Locket Chatterjee  -  Chairperson 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5. Shri Gangasandra Siddappa Basavaraj 
6. Km. Debasree Chaudhuri 
7. Shri Anil Firojiya 
8. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
9. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi 
10. Shri Khagen Murmu 
11. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
12. Shri Subrat Pathak 
13. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
14. Dr. Amar Singh 
15. Smt. Himadri Singh 
16. Smt. Kavita Singh 
17. Shri Nandigam Suresh 
18. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
19. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
20. Shri Vaithilingam Ve. 
21. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed @@  
 
Rajya Sabha 
1. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
2. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
3. Shri Baburam Nishad 
4. Shri Rajmani Patel 
5. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
6. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
7. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
8. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
9. Ms. Dola Sen* 
10. Dr. Ashok Bajpai@ 
 
Committee constituted vide Bulletin Part II, Para No.5293 w.e.f. 13 September, 2022 
*Nominated vide Bulletin Part II, Para No.5313 w.e.f. 12 October, 2022 
@Nominated vide Bulletin Part II, Para No.5745 w.e.f. 16 December, 2022 
Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat Passed away on 29.3.2023 
@@ Nominated on 16.8.2023 
 

 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (2023-24) 
 
     Smt. Locket Chatterjee  -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
6. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi 
7. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed 
5. Km. Debasree Chaudhuri 
6. Dr. Amar Singh 
7. Shri Anil Firojiya 
8. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
9. Shri Khagen Murmu 
10. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
11. Shri Subrat Pathak 
12. Smt. Himadri Singh 
13. Smt. Kavita Singh 
17. Shri Nandigam Suresh 
18. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
19. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
20. Shri Vaithilingam Ve. 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
23. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
24. Shri Rajmani Patel 
25. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
26. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
27. Shri Baburam Nishad 
28. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
29. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
30  Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai             -         Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   -  Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Abdul Khan  - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (2023 -24) having been authorized by the Committee to present the 
Report on their behalf, present this Thirty Ninth Report on the subject, ‘Regulation of 
Weighs and Measures with specific reference to Dispensing Machines at Fuel Stations’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department 
of Consumer Affairs). 
 
2.  The subject was selected by the Committee for examination and r eport.  The 
Committee was briefed on the subject by the representatives of the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) on 
26.07.2023.  Oral evidence of the re presentatives of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs was held on 12.12.2023.  
 
3.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) for 
placing before them  the detailed written notes on the subj ect and for furnishing the 
information to the Committee, desired in connection with the examination of the subject. 
 
4.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
06.02.2024. 
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenie nce, the Observations/Comments of the 
Committee have been printed in bold font in Part II of the Report. 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi;       LOCKET CHATTERJEE, 
06 February, 2024                Chairperson, 
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka)                                  Standing Committee on  
           Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
 
 

1 
 
PART I 
CHAPTER I 
Introductory: 
(i)  An Overview of Department of Consumer Affairs: 
1.1 The Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) is one of the two Departments 
under the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution. The mandate of 
the Department  is consumer advocacy. India was pioneer in consumer advocacy 
with the Consumer Protection Act (CPA), a path breaking legislation at the time, 
enacted in 1986 and the establishment of a separate Government Department 
dedicated to consumer affairs as early as in 1997. The new Consumer Protection 
Act, 2019 came into force on July 20th, 2020 in India, replacing the previous 
enactment of 1986. The new Act overhauls the administration and settlement of 
consumer disputes in India. It provides for strict penalties , including jail terms for 
adulteration and for misleading advertisements. More importantly, it now prescribes 
rules for the sale of goods through e -commerce. Translating this mandate into action 
entail:  
• Enabling consumers to make informed choices; 
• Ensuring fair, equitable and consistent outcomes for consumers; and  
• Facilitating timely and effective consumer grievance redress 
 (ii)  Legal Metrology:  
1.2 As per the Annual Report (2022 -23) of DoCA, Legal Metrology (Weights and 
Measures) Laws form the basis of commercial transaction in any civilized society. To 
ensure accuracy of measurement in such transaction, the Government has enacted 
legislation namely, the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 (1 to 2010). The said Act is unified 
act of two repealed acts name ly the Standards of Weights & Measures Act, 1976 & 
the Standards of Weights & Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985. The Legal 
Metrology Act, 2009 has come into force with effect from 1st April, 2011.  
 
 

2 
 
 
(iii) Attached Offices:  
1.3 The Committee were informed that there are two types of attached offices: 
(a) Regional Reference Standard Laboratories (RRSLs)  are set up to 
meet the Legal Metrology requirements of the State Governments, Industries 
and Consumers in the country. There are six RRSLs, situated at Ahme dabad, 
Bangalore, Bhubaneswar, Faridabad, Guwahati and Varanasi. The Regional 
Reference Standards Laboratories serve as a link between the National 
Physical Laboratory and the States Weights & Measure laboratories to ensure 
the correct weighment and measur ement in trade and transaction.   One new 
RRSLis being established at Nagpur. Regional reference Standards 
Laboratories and Indian Institute of Legal Metrology, Ranchi are accredited by 
National Accreditation Board of Laboratories (NABL). All the subordinate  
offices (RRSLs & IILM, Ranchi) and Legal Metrology Division of the 
Department have already been certified by ISO 9001.  
(b) Indian Institute of Legal Metrology, Ranchi is the National Centre for 
imparting professional training to the Legal Metrology offic ers. It also provides 
training to the foreign participants of the neighboring /developing countries. 
This is a residential training institute and having an approximate area of 17 
acres. It has all the facilities for organizing training and seminars. The in stitute 
offers the Basic Training Course in the field of Legal Metrology to the Legal 
Metrology Officers which is mandatory. The said course imparts knowledge 
pertaining to the Legal Metrology Act and Rules and their implementation in 
the field. Apart from  this it organi zes various refresher courses and seminars 
on Legal Metrology on a regular basis. In a calendar year approximately 200 
officials of Legal Metrology of different States and UTs are being trained by 
IILM. There are good laboratory and hostel facilities in the premises. 

3 
 
     CHAPTER II 
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES FRAMEWORK 
(I) Historical Background of Weights and Measures Law in India 
2.1 The Committee asked the DoCA to furnish the details regarding historical 
background of weights and measures in Ind ia.  In response , in their written replies 
submitted to the Committee, the DoCA informed that the history of weights and 
measures laws in India is quite ancient, spanning back thousands of years. The 
region has a rich tradition of trade and commerce, and a ccurate measurements have 
always been essential for fair trade, economic stability, and social order. Historical 
background of weights and measures regulations in India is as follows: 
(a)    Indus Valley Civilization (3300 –1300 BC) : The Indus Valley 
Civilization, one of the world's ancient urban civilizations, had a well-organized 
system of weights and measures. Archaeological findings include 
standardized weights made from materials like terracotta, stone, and ivory, 
suggesting a structured trade system. 
(b) Mauryan Empire (322 –185 BC): Under the Mauryan rulers, India saw 
advancements in the standardization of weights and measures. Emperor 
Ashoka's inscriptions mention the establishment of "thanas" or local offices to 
ensure the accuracy of measurements and regulate trade. 
(c) Gupta Empire (320–550 AD): During the Gupta period, the practice of 
using standardized weights and measures continued. The Gupta kings issued 
coins with precise weights, contributing to uniformity in trade. 
(d) Medieval Period : Various  Indian dynasties, including the Cholas, 
Rajputs, and Mughals, had their own systems of weights and measures. The 
Mughal rulers, in particular, took interest in standardizing measures, leading 
to the creation of the "Mughal yard" and "Mughal pound." 
(e) Colonial Era (17th –19th centuries):  With the advent of European 
colonial powers, trade relations and measurements underwent significant 
changes. The British East India Company introduced its own systems of 
measurement to facilitate trade and taxation. Effort s to standardize 
measurements were made to enhance administrative efficiency. 

4 
 
(f) British Raj and Metric System (19th –20th centuries):  The British 
colonial administration introduced the British Imperial System of weights and 
measures, which had a significant impact on India's trade practices. However, 
there were inconsistencies and disparities in measurement units across 
different regions. 
(g) Later, in the mid-20th century and Post-Independence and Modern 
Era, there was a push to adopt the metric system, w hich was internationally 
recognized and standardized. India officially adopted the metric system in 
1956 through the Metrication Act, aiming to bring uniformity and accuracy to 
measurements. 
After gaining independence in 1947, India continued to refine and  
strengthen its weights and measures regulations. The Legal Metrology Act, 
2009 established the legal framework for regulating weights, measures, and 
other goods sold or distributed by weight, measure, or number. It aimed to 
ensure accuracy, transparency, and consumer protection. 
In recent years, India has focused on modernizing its metrology 
practices, ensuring compliance with international standards, and enhancing 
consumer awareness about their rights in terms of accurate measurements. 
The State Legal Metrology Departments are responsible for implementing and 
enforcing weights and measures laws in the country. 
(h) The Legal Metrology Act, 2009 is enacted under Entry 50 of List -I 
(Union List) ‘Establishment of standards of weight and measure’ and under 
Entry 33 -A of List -III (Concurrence List) ‘Weights and measures except 
establishment of standards’ in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.   The 
objective of the Act is to ensure public guarantee from the point of view of 
security and accuracy of the weigh ments and measurements and was 
enacted to establish and enforce standards of weights and measures, 
regulate trade and commerce in weights, measures and other goods which 
are sold or distributed by weight, measure or number. The Central 
Government and the S tate Governments are empowered to make Rules 
under section 52 and section 53 of the Act respectively.   
 

5 
 
(i) The Legal Metrology Act, 2009 (No. 1 of 2010) (LM Act, 2009) came 
into force w.e.f. 1 st April 2011 after repealing the Standards of Weights and 
Measures Act, 1976 (No. 60 of 1976) and the Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985 (No. 54 of 1985).    
 
2.2 While acknowledging the crucial role of Accurate measurements in the fuel 
industry and the importance of accurate measurements in fuel industry is paramount, 
the Committee asked DoCA to highlight the importance of accurate measurements in 
fuel industry, it was informed as follows: 
“(a) Economic Impact : The fuel industry is a multi -billion-dollar global 
industry. Accurate measurements are essential to ensure fair and precise 
transactions between suppliers, distributors, and consumers. Inaccurate 
measurements can lead to financial losses, disputes, and legal issues. 
(b) Fair Trade : Accurate measurements promote fair trade by ensuring 
that buyers receive the quantity of fuel they are paying for. It prevents 
instances of fraud where suppliers might try to deliver less fuel than paid for. 
(c) Safety: Accurate measurements are critical for safety in the fuel 
industry. Overfilling fuel storage  tanks or transporting excessive amounts of 
fuel can lead to spillage, leakage, and potentially dangerous situations. 
Accurate measurements help prevent these incidents. 
(d) Environmental Protection: Fuel spills and leakages can have severe 
environmental c onsequences. Accurate measurements help prevent fuel 
releases, minimizing the risk of soil and water contamination, which may harm 
ecosystems and human health.   For petrol dispensing units the vapour 
recovery system is being installed to prevent the toxic fumes of petrol.    
(e) Efficient Operations:  Accurate measurements enable efficient 
operations in fuel refineries, storage facilities and distribution networks. 
Precise measurements help optimize production, inventory management, and 
transportation, leading to cost savings and reduced waste. 
(f) Compliance with Rules : The fuel industry is heavily regulated to 
ensure safety, environmental protection and fair trade. Accurate 
measurements are often a requirement for compliance with regulatory 

6 
 
standards. Non -compliance can result in fines, penalties and reputational 
damage. 
(g) Consumer Trust : Consumers expect to receive the quantity of fuel 
they pay for. Accurate measurements contribute to consumer trust in the 
industry, enhancing the reputation of fuel suppliers and distributors. 
(h) Data Analysis and Planning : Accurate measurements provide 
valuable data for analysis and planning. Data on fuel consumption patterns, 
production yields, and distribution trends help companies make informed 
decisions to optimize their operations and business strategies. 
(i) Supply Chain Efficiency : Accurate measurements are essential to 
maintain the efficiency of the fuel supply chain. Precise measurements help 
prevent shortages, excess inventory and supply chain disruptions.  Ther efore, 
accurate measurements are a cornerstone of the fuel industry, impacting 
economic, safety, environmental and regulatory aspects. They enable fair 
trade, efficient operations and informed decision -making, while also ensuring 
compliance with rules and maintaining consumer trust.” 
(II)  LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
 
2.3 The Committee were informed by the DoCA regarding Legal Framework that 
the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 is enacted under Entry 50 of List -I (Union List) 
‘Establishment of standards of weight and measure’  and under Entry 33 -A of List-III 
(Concurrence List) ‘Weights and measures except establishment of standards’ in the 
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.   The objective of the Act is to ensure public 
guarantee from the point of view of security and accura cy of the weighments and 
measurements and was enacted to establish and enforce standards of weights and 
measures, regulate trade and commerce in weights, measures and other goods 
which are sold or distributed by weight, measure or number. The Central 
Government and the State Governments are empowered to make Rules under 
section 52 and section 53 of the Act respectively.   
2.4 LM Act 2009 is the primary instrument which establishes and enforces the 
standards of weights and measures and regulates trade in wei ghts and measures in 
the country and is the foundation of most business activities in the country.  
 

7 
 
2.5 In their Background Note, DoCA further informed that the Act is having only 
57 Sections.   Section 1 to 3 under Chapter I of the Act provides the extent  and 
commencement, definitions and overriding provisions of the Act.   Section 4 to 12 
under Chapter II, provides for units of weights & measures and standard weights & 
measures.  Under Chapter III Section 13 to 23 the provisions for appointment and 
powers of Director, Controller and Legal Metrology officers are made.   Chapter IV, 
Section 24 provides for verification and stamping of weight or measure. Section 25 to 
47 of LM Act 2009 under Chapter V provides for various penalties by way of levy of 
fine in cas e of first offence.   For second& subsequent offence depending on the 
nature of the offence (i) either imprisonment or fine or both or, (ii) both imprisonment 
and fine or (iii) only imprisonment is prescribed.   Provision of Appeal is made under 
Section 50 of the Act.  Provision for nominating one Director of the company who will 
be responsible by the company under Section 49 of the Legal Metrology Act is 
made.   
 
2.6 Hierarchy of standard of weights and their traceability: 
 
2.7 The DoCA further elaborated t hat the Wings of Legal Metrology:  (Legal 
Metrology Division in the Department) Precision & accuracy in measurement plays 
very vital role in day to day life. A transparent and efficient legal metrology system 
inspires confidence in trade, industry & consume r and brings harmonious 
environment for conducting business by way of(i) contribution to the economy of the 
country by increasing the revenue in various sectors. (ii) playing important role in 
reducing the revenue losses in the coal, mines, industries, pet roleum, railways.  (iii) 
reduction of the loss and wastage in the infrastructure sector. 

8 
 
2.8 The work performed by the Legal Metrology Division therefore, is vital to the 
public interest. Within the Department the Legal Metrology Division is headed by 
Director, Legal Metrology. Director, Legal Metrology is a statutory authority with 
powers and responsibilities prescribed under the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 relating 
to inter-state trade and commerce of weights and measures including pre -packaged 
commodities. Director, Legal Metrology is also responsible for establishing standards 
of Legal Metrology and maintaining traceability of Standards relating to Legal 
Metrology. The primary responsibilities of the Director are in the nature of 
Regulation, Enforcement an d Research.  Regulation and Enforcement functions are 
to undertake technical field inspections, searches, seizures, registration of offices 
and launching prosecutions etc. 
(A) Legal Metrology Act 2009 – Important Provisions 
2.9 The Legal Metrology Act, 2009 has come into force w.e.f. 1 st April, 2011.  The 
Act comprises of 5 Chapters and 57 Sections.   
The important Definitions under the Act are as under: 
(i) 2(f) "label" means any written, marked, stamped, printed or graphic 
matter affixed to, or appearing upon any pre-packaged commodity; 
(ii) 2(k)"protection" means the utilization of reading obtained from any 
weight or measure, for the purpose of determining any step which is required 
to be taken to safeguard the well -being of any human being or animal, or to 
protect any commodity, vegetation or thing, whether individually or 
collectively; 
 
(iii) 2(ℓ) " pre-packaged commodity " means a commodity which without 
the purchaser being present is placed in a package of whatever nature, 
whether sealed or not, so that the product contained therein has a pre -
determined quantity; 
 
(iv) 2(m) "person" includes,- 
(i) a Hindu undivided family, 
(ii) every department or office, 
(iii) every organisation established or constituted by Government, 
(iv) every local authority within the territory of India, 

9 
 
(v) a company, firm and association of individuals, 
(vi) trust constituted under an Act, 
(vii) every co-operative society, constituted under an Act, 
(viii) every other society registered under the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860; 
 
(v) 2(s) "seal" means a device or process by which a stamp is made, and 
includes any wire or other accessory which is used for ensuring the integrity of 
any stamp; 
 
(vi) 2(t) " stamp" means a mark, made by impressing, casting, engraving, 
etching, branding, affixing pre stressed paper seal or any other process in 
relation to, any weight or measure with a view to- 
 
(i) certifying that such weight or measure conforms to the standard 
specified by or under this Act, or 
(ii) indicating that any mark which was prev iously made thereon 
certifying that such weight or measure conforms to the standards 
specified by or under this Act, has been obliterated; 
 
(vii) 2(u) "transaction" means,- 
(i) any contract, whether for sale, purchase, exchange or any other 
purpose, or 
(ii) any assessment of royalty, toll, duty or other dues, or 
(iii) the assessment of any work done, wages due or services rendered; 
2.10 Provisions for Verification and stamping of weight or measure under Section 
24 of the Act: 
(1) Every person having any weight or measure in his possession, custody 
or control in circumstances indicating that such weight or measure is being, or 
is intended or is likely to be, used by him in any transaction or for protection, 
shall, before putting such weight or measure into su ch use, have such weight 
or measure verified at such place and during such hours as the Controller 

10 
 
may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf, on payment of such 
fees as may be prescribed. 
(2)  The Central Government may prescribe the kinds o f weights and 
measures for which the verification is to be done through the Government 
approved Test Centre. 
(3)  The Government approved Test Centre shall be notified by the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, in such manner, 
on such terms and conditions and on payment of such fee as may be 
prescribed. 
(4)  The Government approved Test Centre shall appoint or engage 
persons having such qualifications and experience and collect such fee on 
such terms and conditions for the verifi cation of weights and measures 
specified under sub-section (2) as may be prescribed. 
(B) Rules under Legal Metrology Act 
2.11 The Committee were apprised that the Central Government has made seven 
rules for the better implementation of the Act. The State Governments have also 
framed their Legal Metrology (Enforcement) Rules. The following Legal Metrology 
Rules have been framed under the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 for protection of 
consumer interest:  
a) The Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011  
b) The Legal Metrology (General) Rules, 2011  
c) The Legal Metrology (Approval of Models) Rules, 2011 
d) The Legal Metrology (National Standards) Rules, 2011  
e) The Legal Metrology (Numeration) Rules, 2011  
f) The Indian Institute of Legal Metrology Rules, 2011  
g) The Legal Metrology (Government Approved Test Centre) Rules, 2013 
 

11 
 
2.12 The DoCA has further informed the Committee that Legal Metrology is the 
application of legal requirements to measurements and measuring instruments which 
help to ensure:- 
 public guarantee from the point of view of security and accuracy of the 
weighments and measurements 
 builds confidence in trade, industry & consumer and 
 create harmonious environment for conducting business. 
2.13 The Legal Metrology (General) Rules, 2011 : Specifications for weighing and 
measuring instruments have been prescribed in the Legal Metrology (General) 
Rules, 2011 which include around 40 types of weighing and measuring instruments 
such as electronic weighing instruments, weighbridges, petrol pumps, w ater meter, 
sphygmomanometer (B P Meter), clinical thermometer etc. These weighing and 
measuring instruments are used by industries, traders, hospitals and various 
government and non -government organizations for the weighing and measuring 
purpose and the e nd results of the weighing and measuring are directly for the 
benefit of the common man.   These weighing and measuring instruments are 
periodically verified by the State Government officers using the Standard Weights 
and Measures and the procedure prescribed in the Rules.     
2.14 The Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011:  
 ‘pre-packaged commodity’ is defined under the Act as, ‘a commodity which 
without the purchaser being present is placed in a package of whatever nature, 
whether sealed or not , so that the product contained therein has a pre -
determined quantity’. 
 
 As per the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011 certain 
mandatory declarations have to be made on every package, which are: 
 
(i) Name and address of the manufacturer/ packer/ importer; 
(ii) Country of origin if imported 
(iii) Common or generic name of the commodity contained in the package; 

12 
 
(iv) Net quantity, in terms of standard unit of weight or measure or in number; 
(v) Month and year of manufacture/ pack/ import;   
(vi) Best before or use by date, month and year, in case of commodity becoming 
unfit for human consumption with time 
(vii) Retail sale price in the form of Maximum Retail Price (MRP) Rs….. Inclusive 
of all taxes; 
(viii) Unit sale price (w.e.f. 01.09.2023)  
(ix) Consumer care details. 
2.15 The Committee were apprised that the Rule 13 of the said Rules prescribes 
for statement of units of weight, measure or number for declaring the quantity of the 
commodities in terms of standard unit of weights and measures.   Under the said 
Rules provisions are also made for inspection of quantity and error in packages at 
the premises of the manufacturer or packer and at the premises of the wholesale 
dealer or retail dealer.   Provision is also made for the establishment of maxi mum 
permissible error on packages.   The maximum permissible errors on net quantity 
declared by weight or volume are prescribed under First Schedule of the said Rules. 
 
2.16 In their Background Note, the DoCA has further informed that under the Legal 
Metrology (Approval of Models) Rules, 2011, the  Manufacturers/Importers of 
Weighing and Measuring equipment, which are prescribed under the Legal 
Metrology Act, 2009 and rules made there under, are required to take approval of the 
Government of India before manu facturing/import.  Some of the equipment like cast 
iron, brass, bullion, or carat weight or any beam scale, length measures (not being 
measuring tapes) which are ordinarily used in retail trade for measuring textiles or 
timber, capacity measures, not excee ding twenty litre in capacity are not required to 
obtain Model approval. 
2.17 The Legal Metrology (National Standards) Rules, 2011: 
(i) Under the Rules there is provision of National Prototypes/various standards 
to be kept at National Physical Laboratory. 

13 
 
(ii) Reference Standards of weights and measures are kept at Regional 
Reference Standard Laboratories at Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Bhubaneswar, 
Faridabad, Guwahati and Varanasi. 
(iii) Reference Standards are used for the verification of Secondary Standard 
Weights & Measures which are kept at State Government Laboratories. 
(iv) The Working Standard Weights & Measures are available at the district 
level which are used for the verification of any weight or measure used by 
traders and manufacturers for the transact ion and protection purposes. The 
Working Standard Weights & Measures are verified by the Secondary 
Standard Weights & Measures. 
2.18 The Legal Metrology (Numeration) Rules, 2011: Under these rules the 
provision is made for making Numeration and the Manner in which numbers shall be 
written. 
 
2.19 Indian Institute of Legal Metrology Rules, 2011: Indian Institute of Legal 
Metrology, Ranchi is the training institute under the administrative control of this 
Department, providing training in the field of Legal Me trology to the Legal Metrology 
Officers of States/ UTs/ Union of India . Under these rules provisions regarding 
courses to be imparted at the Institute, obligatory functions of the Institute, 
qualification of persons to be eligible for admission in the Institute are prescribed. 
2.20 The Legal Metrology (Government Approved test Centre) Rules, 2013 : The 
Government Approved Test Centre (GATC) Rules are framed for approval of GATCs 
established by the private persons for the verification of some of the weights a nd 
measures, in addition to verification done by the State Government Officers. The 
weights and measures prescribed under these rules for the verification by a GATC 
are:-  
(i) Water meter, (ii) Sphygmomanometer, (iii) Clinical Thermometer, (iv) Automatic 
Rail Weighbridges, (v) Tape Measures, (vi) Non -automatic weighing instrument of 
Accuracy Class -IIII/ Class -III (upto 150kg), (vii) Load cell, (viii) Beam Scale, (ix) 
Counter Machine and (x) Weights of all Categories. 
 

14 
 
(C) The Legal Metrology Act 2009 vis a vis The Jan Vishwas (Amendment of 
Provisions) Act, 2023 
2.21 The Legal Metrology Act, 2009 aims to establish standards for weights and 
measures and regulate trade and commerce concerning goods sold or distributed by 
weight, measure, or number. This Act pla ys a crucial role in safeguarding the rights 
of consumers and ensuring fair trade practices in India 
2.22 The Committee note that in a significant legislative development, the JAN 
VISHWAS (AMENDMENT OF PROVISIONS) ACT, 2023 was passed . The aim of 
this Act is to enhance the ease of living and ease of doing business in India. Under 
this Act, amendments were also made to the Legal Metrology Act, 2009, which falls 
under the DoCA. 
Some notable Amendments in the Legal Metrology Act 2009 stood as under::- 
Section 
of the 
current 
Act 
Offense Penalties after amendment in Act 
25 Penalty for use of 
non-standard weight 
or measure 
Twenty-five thousand rupees and for the second 
or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to six months and also 
with fine", the words "one lakh rupees and for the 
second offence with fine which may extend to two 
lakh rupees and for the third and subsequent 
offence, with fine which may extend to five lakh 
rupees. 
27 Penalty for 
manufacture or sale 
of non-standard 
weight or measure 
Twenty thousand rupees and for the second or 
subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years or with fine or 
with both", the words "one lakh rupees and for 
the second offence with fine which may extend to 
two lakh rupees and for the third and subsequent 
offence, with fine which may extend to four lakh 

15 
 
rupees. 
28 Penalty for making 
any transaction in 
contravention of 
prescribed standards 
Ten thousand rupees and for the second or 
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or 
with both, the words "fifty thousand rupees and 
for the second offence with fine which may 
extend to one lakh rupees and for the third and 
subsequent offence with fine which may extend 
to two lakh rupees. 
29 Penalty for quoting or 
publishing non-
standard units 
Ten thousand rupees and, for the second or 
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or 
with both, the words "fifty thousand rupees for the 
second offence with fine which may extend to 
one lakh rupees and for the third and subsequent 
offence with a fine which may extend to two lakh 
rupees. 
31 Penalty for non-
production of 
documents 
Five thousand rupees and for the second or 
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year and also with fine, 
the words "twenty -five thousand rupees and for 
the second offence with fine which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees and for the third and 
subsequent offence, with fine whi ch may extend 
to one lakh rupees. 
34 Penalty for sale or 
delivery of 
commodities by non-
standard weight or 
measure 
Fine which shall not be less than two thousand 
rupees, but which may extend to five thousand 
rupees and, for the second or subsequent 
offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than three months but which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both, the 
words fine which may extend to twenty -five 

16 
 
thousand rupees and for the second offence with 
fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees 
and for the third and subsequent offence, with 
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees. 
35 Penalty for rendering 
services by non-
standard weight, 
measure, or number 
In section 35, for the words "fine which shall not 
be less than two thousand rupees, but which may 
extend to five thousand rupees and, for the 
second or subsequent offence, with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less 
than three months but which may extend to one 
year, or with fine, or with both", the words "fine 
which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees 
and for the second offence with fine which may 
extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the third 
and subsequent offence, with fine which may 
extend to one lakh rupees" shall be substituted. 
 
2.23 The Act sig nificantly modifies penalties under the Legal Metrology Act, 2009, 
by replacing imprisonment with higher fines for various offenses related to non -
standard weights, measures and units. 

17 
 
        CHAPTER III 
Dispensing Machines at Fuel Stations 
(i) An Overview 
3.1 As informed , there are following number of Retail Outlets of Oil Marketing 
Companies (OMCs) in the country as on 1.10.2023 , the Storage facilities across the 
country:  
Company IOC BPC HPC RIL NEL MRPL NRL Total 
POL Terminals/ 
Depots  (Nos.) 
120 82 81 18 3 4 2 310 
 
Details of outlets across the country (as on 1.10.2023) 
Company IOC BPC HPC RIL NEL Shell MRPL 
&Others 
Total 
Retail 
Outlets  
36693 21331 21482 1603 6403 345 68 87925 
SKO / LDO 
Agencies 
3849 927 1638     6414 
 
3.2 India i s an International Organisation of Legal Metrology (OIML) member 
country and the recommendations made by OIML are adopted as per our 
requirements in the General Rules, as the manufacturing of these machines is as per 
international standards and therefore, technical specifications etc. are as per 
international standards. 
3.3 The accuracy class of fuel dispensers for motor vehicles (other than LPG 
dispensers) as per rules is 0.5 and the Maximum permissible error is 0.5% for 
volumes not smaller than 2 litres a nd therefore, it becomes 25 ml for sale of 5 litre 
petrol/ diesel and for 2 litre it will be 10 ml [Part -2, Para 2(5)(i) of Part IV - measuring 
system for Liquids other than water in the Eighth Schedule - specifications for 
measuring instruments of the Legal Metrology (General) Rules, 2011]. 

18 
 
3.4 For volumes smaller than two litres, and without prejudice to the above 
paragraph, the maximum permissible errors, positive or negative, on volume 
indications are specified in Table below [Part -2, Para 2(5)(ii) of P art IV - measuring 
system for Liquids other than water in the Eighth Schedule - specifications for 
measuring instruments of the Legal Metrology (General) Rules, 2011]: 
TABLE 
Sr. 
No. 
Measured 
quantity 
Maximum permissible errors 
1 From 1 to 2 L Value applied to 2 L (i.e. 10 ml) 
2 From 0.4 to 1 L Twice the value fixed in Para 5.3 (i.e. 1%) (4 ml to 10 ml) 
3 0.2 to 0.4 L Twice the value fixed in Para 5.3 (i.e. 1%) (applied to 0.4 L) 
(4 ml) 
4 From 0.1 to 0.2 L Quadruple the value fixed in Para 5.3 (i.e. 2%) (2ml to 4 ml) 
5 Less than 0.1 L Quadruple the value fixed in Para 5.3 (i.e. 2%) (applied to 0.1 
L) (2ml) 
 
3.5 However, whatever the measured quantity may be, the magnitude of the 
maximum permissible error is given by the greater of the following two values: 
(a) absolute value of the maximum permissible error given in Para 2(5)(i) or 
Para 2(5)(ii) as above in Para 5.1 and 5.2 
         (b) minimum specified volume deviation. 
(i) For minimum measured quantities greater than or equal to two litres, the 
minimum specified volume deviation (Emin) is given by the formula: 
                           Emin = (2 Vmin) x (A/100) 
 where 
 Vmin is the minimum measured quantity, 
 A=0.5 (for petrol/ diesel dispensing units)   

19 
 
(ii) For minimum measured quantities less than t wo litres, the minimum 
specified volume deviation is twice the value specified in Para 5.4 [Part -2, Para 
2(5)(ii) of Part IV - measuring system for Liquids other than water in the Eighth 
Schedule - specifications for measuring instruments of the Legal Metr ology 
(General) Rules, 2011]. 
3.6. The Committee were apprised that a  round table workshop on “measurement 
of petroleum products and related issues” was held on 09.06.2023 under the 
chairmanship of Shri Rohit Kumar Singh, Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs 
at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi.   The workshop was participated by all the 
stakeholders’ viz. representatives of Oil Marketing Companies, representatives of the 
Petroleum Dealers Associations, Controllers of Legal Metrology of all States/ UTs, 
representative of C-DAC and FCRI etc. Various issues of the Petroleum Retail Outlet 
Dealers were resolved during the workshop.  
3.7. The Committee were also informed that the DoCA had held a  meeting with 
Petroleum Dealers Associations, Oil Marketing Companies and State Legal 
Metrology Departments of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu on 
29.9.2023 at Vishakhapatnam to discuss and resolve the issues of petroleum 
dealers and to ensure the correct quantity to the consumers.  
3.8. It was further brought to  the notice of the Committee that f or calibration of 
depot towers a standard operating procedure (SoP) for the whole country prepared 
by the Petroleum Dealers Association has been circulated to all OMCs for 
uniformity.    
3.9 Regarding Marketing Discipline  Guidelines (MDG)  pertaining to Dispensing 
Machines at Retail Outlets , the Committee were informed that in order to ensure 
effective management of retail networks and establish elevated benchmarks for 
customer service within the dealer network, Oil Marketi ng Companies have 
developed Marketing Discipline Guidelines (MDG). These Guidelines were initially 
formulated in 1981 -82 and have undergone subsequent revisions to align with 
evolving market conditions. The most recent modification to MDG was implemented 
on November 30, 2022.  

20 
 
3.10 Procedure for handling of products at retail outlet by dealers: It will be the 
responsibility of the Dealers to sell product of correct Quality and Quantity and 
provide excellent customer service. 
3.11  Quantity: 
a) The dealer shall check on daily basis the Weights & Measures Dept. seal of 
the Metering Unit / Totaliser of the dispensing units for correctness and also 
that Weights & Measures certification for the unit is valid. In case W&M / 
totaliser seals are found tampered, sale s through the concerned dispensing 
unit should be suspended forthwith and matter reported immediately to 
controlling oil company office. Sales to remain suspended till the seals are 
replaced. 
b) Dealer to keep a standard 5 litre measure duly verified by th e Weights & 
Measures Department for exclusive use of pump testing at the retail outlet.  
c) All measures used for dispensing bulk lube oil in the pump island and 
service bays must be duly stamped by Weights & Measures Department. 
d) It is the responsibilit y of the dealer to ensure correct supply of fuel to the 
customers all the time. All the nozzles of the Dispensing units should be 
checked for correct delivery on daily basis before commencement of sales. 
The quantity used for testing to be recorded in the stock register. In case of 
variation in delivery of dispensing units, the same should be immediately 
notified to Weights & Measures Department, as also to the Controlling Oil 
Company Office. Re -stamping will be done by the Weights & Measures 
Department. Un til re -stamping is carried out and delivery is set right, the 
dealer should not operate the Dispensing unit. 
e) Dealer to carry out visual checks on a daily basis for any leaks in pump, 
delivery hose/nozzle. Such leaks, if any, must immediately be reported  to the 
concerned Oil Company for rectification. 
f) Dealer to ensure that after each delivery from the pump, the pump meter is 
brought back to zero before commencing the next delivery. A message to this 
effect should be displayed on each pump unit and the ‘Zero’ setting should be 
shown to the customer, before start of each delivery by the pump attendant. 

21 
 
3.12  Observance of statutory and other regulations: All statutory rules and 
regulations in connection with storage and sale of petroleum products must be 
followed and implemented, such as maintaining stock / sales & density records, 
display of daily stock, price board etc. 
3.13  Customer Services and general amenities to be provided by the dealer :  
Retail Outlet Dealer should ensure quality product at corr ect quantity and correct 
price. 
3.14 Maintenance of company equipments at Retail Outlets: Dispenser 
maintenances are governed by clauses of Marketing Discipline Guidelines.   
3.15 The Committee were informed that Currently OMCs have Comprehensive 
Annual Ma intenance contracts with Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM) for 
Dispenser maintenance.  OEMs maintain the dispensing units as per the terms and 
conditions of contracts placed and governed by the repair licenses issued by State 
Legal Metrology. 
3.16  Rectification of Defects in Dispensing units/Pipeline/ Tanks : Dispensing Units 
Calibration – If the pump is delivering short / excess, the Company’s Maintenance 
Representative / Dealer should immediately arrange for recalibration with the help of 
the Weights & Measures Inspector.   In case the Weights & Measures Department 
seal is found to be broken, the Oil Company’s Maintenance Representative shall 
inform the concerned Company Official for further action and incorporate the same in 
the Pump maintenance Report which should be duly signed by the dealer as well. 
3.17  Short Delivery of Products :  The Committee were informed that with Weights 
& Measures Department Seals intact, Sales through the concerned dispensing unit 
to be suspended forthwith and recalibra tion and re -stamping to be done before 
recommencement of sales. (Even if short/excess delivery is found within permissible 
limit, recalibration and re- stamping to be done before recommencement of sales). 
With Weights & Measures department Seals tampered, W&M department 
seals are put on Metering unit and Totaliser unit with the help of a sealing wire and a 
lead seal which is embossed by W&M inspector. The seal would be deemed 
tampered in the following cases also: 
(i).  Seal itself is missing 

22 
 
(ii).  Different seal has been put other than embossed by W&M inspector 
(iii).  Sealing wire is broken and not in one piece. 
In addition, other situations which can lead to manipulation of delivery/quantity 
/ totaliser may also be treated as tampering. In such cases, vie ws and opinion of 
W&M authorities would be obtained and the opinion rendered by the W&M 
department should be final. Based on the opinion of the W&M authorities, Penal 
action to be taken even if the delivery is found to be correct or excess.  
In case of thi s irregularity, sales from the concerned dispensing unit to be 
suspended, DU sealed. Samples to be drawn of all the products and sent to lab for 
testing.  
3.18  The Committee were apprised that Totalizer Seals found Tampered with 
Totaliser seals will also be construed as tampered if it allows manipulation of 
Totaliser reading; deliberately making the Totaliser non -functional or not reporting to 
the OMC if Totaliser is not working. In such cases, views and opinion of W&M 
authorities would be obtained and the  opinion rendered by the W&M department 
should be final. In case of this irregularity, sales from the concerned dispensing unit 
to be suspended & DU sealed.  Samples to be drawn of all the products and sent to 
lab for testing. 
3.19  Additional/ Unauthorise d Fittings/ Gears found in Dispensing Units/ 
Tampering with Dispensing Unit : The Committee were informed that any 
mechanism / fittings / gear found fitted in the dispensing unit which is likely to 
manipulate the delivery. Addition, Removal, replacement or  manipulation of any part 
of the Dispensing Unit including any mechanism, gear, microprocessor chip/ 
electronic parts/ OEM software will be deemed as tampering of the dispensing unit. 
In such cases, views and independent opinion of the original equipment 
manufacturer would be obtained and suitable decision taken. In case of this 
irregularity, sales from the concerned dispensing unit to be suspended, DU sealed. 
Samples to be drawn of all the products and sent to lab for testing. 
3.20 Non-Maintenance of Speci fied Records: Dealers are required to maintain 
various records including the following. Non -maintenance of below mentioned 
records will be treated as an irregularity. 

23 
 
i. Daily sales register of OMC & Density register for current and previous 
financial years. 
ii. Pump maintenance records for current and previous financial years. 
iii. Inspection record for previous five years 
iv. Purchase Invoices & sales bills for the current and previous financial years 
v. Selling license, Explosives License and such other licenses which are 
needed for continued operation of the RO 
vi. Any other record as specified by OMCs in writing. 
3.21  Action to be taken by OMC under the Marketing Discipline Guidelines : The 
Committee were informed that all irregularities (mentioned abo ve) are classified into 
three categories, i.e. Critical, Major and Minor and details like list of such 
irregularities, Penal action in first, second, third and subsequent instances, process 
to be followed, competent authority and appellate proceedings are covered under 
MDG. 
(ii) Verification, Stamping & Declaration of Dispensing Machines 
3.22 The DoCA in a presentation to the Committee as follows: 
" “ Verification", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, 
includes, in relation to any weight or measure, the process of comparing, 
checking, testing or adjusting such weight or measure with a view to ensuring 
that such weight or measure conforms to the standards established by or 
under this Act and also includes re -verification and calibration; 
 

24 
 
Mandatory declarations of dispensing unit are given on the plate fixed on the 
machine 
" 
3.23. The DoCA vide their representatives apprised the Committee : 
“… Further, all dispenser configurations are tested thoroughly for software 
and hardware integrity a nd security features at CDAC (Centre for 
Development of Advanced Computing, Government of India) before 
deployment in Retail Outlets.  CDAC is the premier R&D organisation of 
the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) for carrying 
out R&D in IT, Electronics, and associated areas.” 
(iii) Fair Practices at Fuel Stations 
3.24 Regarding fair practices at fuel stations in the country, the Committee were 
apprised by the DoCA that there were several challenges that authorities and 
stakeholders were facing in achieving this goal which inter alia include: 
(i) Accurate Measurement: Accurate measurement of the quantity of fuel 
dispensed is essential. Short -measurement, where customers receive less 
fuel than they paid for, may occur due to inaccurate  or tampered dispensing 
equipment. 
(ii) Tampering and Fraud: Tampering with dispensing units to manipulate 
measurements by adjusting calibration settings, using illegal "chips," or other 
means to dispense less fuel than indicated. 
(iii) Lack of Regular Inspections: The frequent inspection and verification 
of fuel dispensing equipment by Legal Metrology/ Oil Marketing Companies 
may be challenging. Limited resources and oversight may result in irregular 
inspections, providing opportunities for unscrupulous practices. 

25 
 
(iv) Consumer Awareness: Many consumers lack awareness about their 
rights and the proper way to verify measurements and fuel quality. This 
makes them vulnerable to unfair practices. 
(v) Remote Monitoring Difficulties: Monitoring fuel stations, esp ecially in 
remote or rural areas is challenging and may lead to decreased vigilance and 
accountability. 
(vi) Technological Advancements : While technology can improve 
transparency, it may also lead to more sophisticated methods of tampering 
and manipulation which needs to be monitored. 
(vii) Complex Supply Chain : Ensuring fair practices extends beyond fuel 
stations to the entire supply chain. Illicit activities may occur at any point, from 
production to distribution. 
3.25. Asked about the specifications of fuel dispensers, the DoCA replied: 
“The fuel dispensers are manufactured based on the specifications as per the 
International Standards provided by the International Organization of the 
Legal Metrology, the Legal Metrology (General) Rules, 2011 and as per t he 
specifications provided by the OMCs.” 
3.26. As regards the average length of the fuel dispensing pipes, the DoCA 
informed the Committee: 
“The fuel dispensing pipes are designed to connect the dispensing machines 
with consumer’s fuel tank, which is gener ally upto 5 metre. However, the 
average length may vary depending on several factors, including the design of 
the fuel station, the location of the dispensers, and the layout of the facility”. 
(iv) Specifications for Weighing & Measuring Instruments 
3.27 The Committee were informed regarding s pecifications for weighing and 
measuring instruments which have been prescribed in the Legal Metrology (General) 
Rules, 2011 comprising around 40 types of weighing and measuring instruments 
including petrol pumps. Thes e weighing and measuring instruments were used by 
industries, traders, hospitals and various government and non -government 
organizations for the weighing and measurement purpose and the end results of the 

26 
 
weighing and measuring were directly for the benefi t of the common people. These 
weighing and measuring instruments were being periodically verified by the State 
Government officers using the Standard Weights and Measures and the procedure 
prescribed in the Rules.  
3.28 On being enquired regarding the Comm ittee further enquired regarding the 
details of the weighing and measuring instruments included in Legal Metrology 
(General) Rules, 2011 the DoCA apprised the Committee that t he Legal Metrology 
(General) Rules, 2011 were being an important piece of legisla tion that lays down 
the rules related to weights and measures. These rules define the legal framework 
for various weighing and measuring instruments and their usage to ensure fairness 
and accuracy in trade transactions. The following were the weighing and measuring 
instruments covered under these rules: 
S. No. Weighing & Measuring Instrument  
1 Reference Standard Weights 
2 Reference Standard Metre Bar 
3 Secondary Standard Weights 
4 Secondary Standard Metre Bar 
5 Secondary Standard Capacity Measures 
6 Working Standard Weights 
7 Working Standard Metre Bar 
8 Working Standard Capacity Measures 
9 Reference Standard Balances 
10 Secondary Standard Balances 
11 Working Standard Balances 
12 Weights (Other than Carat Weights) 
13 Carat Weights 
14 Standard Weights for testing of High Capacity Weighing Machine 
15 Liquid Capacity Measures 
16 Dispensing Measures 
17 Liquor Measures 
18 Length Measures (Non-Flexible) 
19 Folding Scales 
20 Fabric or Plastic Tape Measure 

27 
 
21 Steel Tape Measures 
22 Surveying Chains 
23 Tapes for Use in Measurement of Oil Quantities 
24 Specifications for non-automatic weighing instruments 
25 Beam Scales 
26 Counter Machines 
27 Automatic Rail Weighbridge 
28 Automatic Gravimetric Filling Instruments 
29 Discontinuous Totalizing Automatic Weighing Instrument 
(Totalizing Hopper Weighers) 
30 Volumetric Container Filling Machines 
31 Bulk Meters 
32 Water Meters 
33 Measuring Systems for Liquids Other than Water 
34 Volumetric Container Type Liquid Measuring Device 
35 Clinical Thermometer 
36 Monometers of Instruments for Measuring Arterial Blood  
Pressure (Sphygmomanometers) 
37 Taximeter 
38 Compressed gaseous fuel (CNG) measuring systems for vehicles 
39 Calibration of Vehicle Tanks for Petroleum Products and other  
Liquids 
40 Method for Calibration of Vertical Oil Storage Tanks 
 
 
(v) Technological Advancements and Impact 
3.29 The Committee enquired about the advancements in technology and the 
impact on weighing and measuring instruments and potential future developments 
and ar eas of improvement in the regulatory landscape over the last 10 years.   In 
response, the Committee were informed at that the a dvancements in technology 
have significantly impacted weighing and measuring instruments in India over the 
last decade. These adva ncements have improved accuracy, efficiency and 
transparency in trade transactions. Some key developments and potential future 
directions in the regulatory landscape of weighing and measuring instruments were: 

28 
 
(i) Digital and Electronic Weighing Scales : Tr aditional mechanical 
weighing scales have been largely replaced by digital and electronic scales. 
These scales offer higher precision, ease of use and features like automatic 
taring and data logging etc. 
(ii)  Integration with wireless technology : Many mod ern weighing and 
measuring instruments can be integrated through Bluetooth or other wireless 
technologies. This allows for remote monitoring, data storage and real -time 
tracking of measurements. 
(iii)  RFID Technology : Radio Frequency Identification (RFID)  technology 
has been integrated into measuring instruments, enabling automated 
identification and data capture. This enhances traceability and reduces 
manual data entry errors. 
(iv)  Cloud-Based Solutions : Cloud technology has enabled the storage 
and analysis of measurement data in a centralized manner. This is particularly 
useful for businesses with multiple locations or those needing historical data 
for analysis. 
(v) Blockchain for Traceability : Blockchain technology has the potential 
to enhance the trace ability and transparency of supply chains, ensuring that 
measurements are accurate and tamper-proof. 
(vi)  Remote Calibration and Maintenance : Some weighing instruments 
may be calibrated and maintained remotely, reducing downtime and the need 
for physical intervention. 
3.30 Regarding Potential Future Developments and Areas of Improvement, the 
DoCA apprised the Committee that  Industries may use the advance technology for 
the improvement of weighing & measuring instrument.  Few of them are: 
 
(i) IoT Integrati on: Internet of Things (IoT) integration may enable real -
time monitoring and control of weighing and measuring instruments, 
improving efficiency and reducing errors. 

29 
 
(ii) Data Analytics : Advanced data analytics may provide insights into 
measurement trends, allowing businesses to optimize processes and predict 
maintenance needs. 
 
(iii) Machine Learning and AI : These technologies may be used to 
identify patterns and anomalies in measurement data, leading to proactive 
maintenance and better accuracy. 
(iv) Mobile Apps for Consumers : Mobile applications may empower 
consumers to verify measurements during transactions, increasing 
transparency and trust. 
 
(v) Enhanced Security Measures: As technology advances, ensuring the 
security of measurement data against hacking and tampering becomes crucial 
and therefore, need enhanced security measures. 
(vi) Eco-Friendly Solutions : Developments in materials and 
manufacturing processes may lead to more environmentally friendly weighing 
and measuring instruments. 
(vii) Standardization and Interoperability : As various technologies are 
integrated into measurement instruments, ensuring interoperability and 
adherence to international standards becomes important. 
(viii) Education and Awareness: Continued efforts to educate businesses , 
consumers and regulatory authorities about the benefits of accurate 
measurements and the proper use of advanced instruments are essential. 
3.31 Regarding Regulatory Framework Modernization, the Committee were 
apprised by the Committee that over the last decade, there have been several areas 
of improvement and developments in the regulatory landscape of legal metrology in 
India. These improvements are aimed at enhancing consumer protection, ensuring 
accuracy in measurements and promoting fair trade practices. 
(i) Digitalization and Technology Adoption:  There has been a shift 
towards the adoption of digital solutions and technology for the process of 
verification, inspection and monitoring of weighing and measuring 

30 
 
instruments. Digital platforms and mobile a pplications have been explored to 
improve transparency and efficiency in regulatory processes. 
(ii) Online Registration and Licensing:  The introduction of online 
registration and licensing processes has simplified the application and 
renewal procedures for businesses involved in manufacturing, repair, and sale 
of weighing and measuring instruments. 
(iii) Standardization and Harmonization: Efforts have been made to align 
Indian standards with international legal metrology standards, promoting 
harmonization and facilitating global trade. 
(iv) Risk-Based Inspections:  Implementing risk -based inspection 
strategies allows authorities to focus resources on areas with higher potential 
for violations, optimizing enforcement efforts. 
(v) Enhanced Penalties: Penalties for non-compliance have been revised 
and increased to serve as stronger deterrents against unfair trade practices. 
(vi) Strengthened Legal Framework:  Amendments and updates to the 
Legal Metrology rules have been made to address emerging challenges, plug 
loopholes and align with changing industry practices. 
(vii) International Collaboration:  Collaboration with international 
organizations and standards bodies has helped India stay updated with global 
metrology trends and best practices. 
3.32 The DoCA informed in written reply that : 
“……advancements in technology have significantly impacted weighing and 
measuring instruments in India over the last decade. These advancements 
have improved accuracy, efficiency and transparency in trade transactions. 
Here are some  key developments and potential future directions in the 
regulatory landscape of weighing and measuring instruments……” 
“……..Over the last decade, there have been several areas of improvement 
and developments in the regulatory landscape of legal metrology i n India. 
These improvements are aimed at enhancing consumer protection, ensuring 

31 
 
accuracy in measurements and promoting fair trade practices. Some key 
areas of improvement over the last 10 years include…….” 
“………There has been a shift towards the adoption o f digital solutions and 
technology for the process of verification, inspection and monitoring of 
weighing and measuring instruments. Digital platforms and mobile 
applications have been explored to improve transparency and efficiency in 
regulatory processes…….” 
“……….It is to state that while progress has been made in these areas, there 
might still be ongoing challenges and opportunities for further enhancement in 
the regulatory landscape of legal metrology.  Therefore, regulatory landscape 
will need to adapt to the changes to ensure that advancements are harnessed 
effectively while safeguarding consumer interests and maintaining fair trade 
practices…….” 
 
3.33.  Regarding detection of irregularities, the Committee were informed: 
In terms of sensing irregularit ies and alerting concerned agencies, the use of 
technology is very important for monitoring and early detection of anomalies. 
The components and features that are part of such a setup: 
  
(i)      Surveillance Systems : Using cameras at retail outlets and ot her 
monitoring devices to gather data from various locations. 
  
(ii)     Cyber security Measures: Implementing robust cybersecurity protocols 
to protect the Dispensing Unit from external threats and ensuring the integrity 
and confidentiality of the data stored in the machine. 
  
(iii)    Enforcement: The regular inspections of law enforcement agencies to 
detect irregularities. 
  
(iv)    Regular inspections by Oil Marketing Companies : The Regular 
inspections made by Oil Marketing Companies officers ensure the  correct 
delivery to consumers. 
 

32 
 
(vi) Monitoring of Fuel Stations 
 
3.34 The Committee were informed that the responsibility in relation to weights and 
measures is shared between the Centre and the States. Matters of National Policy 
and other related functi ons such as, uniform laws on weights and measures 
,technical regulations, training, precision laboratory facilities and implementation of 
the International Recommendation are the concern of the Central Government. The 
State Governments and Union Territory Administration are responsible for the day-to-
day enforcement of the laws. 
 
The Weights and Measures Unit in the D/o Consumer Affairs, being the 
central authority for dealing with the subject, is required to handle all the matters 
falling within the purvie w of the Central Government. In addition, it has to guide, co -
ordinate and supervise the enforcement activities of the state enforcement 
machinery 
 
3.35   HPCL in a written reply informed that Fuel Dispensers are the key front -end 
equipment at OMCs’ Fuel R etail Outlet forecourts, which are used to dispense 
automotive fuels. Multi Product Dispensing (MPD) units are designed to measure, 
register and deliver accurately the desired quantities of fuel to customers.  Over the 
years, in line with technological upg radation in all fields of engineering, the fuel 
dispensing units have also undergone major technological upgradation and 
modernization of equipment. Yester years suction type pumps with mechanical 
counters & meters in the fuel dispensing units, have progre ssed to submersible 
turbine pumps with electronic meters. The digital technology is being used widely for 
measuring and recording the quantity & price display in the fuel machines.  From 
single product fuel dispensing machines of earlier days to multi prod uct machines 
are the norm of the day. This provides more flexibility to the fuel station design and 
operation and is convenient to the customers and fuel station operators to serve the 
customers efficiently and effectively. The overall efficiency of the fu el station is 
increasing by providing the Multi Product Dispensing (MPD) Units at fore court for 
fuel dispensing.  The dispensing machines hydraulics have remained the same for 
the last so many years. But there is a technological upgradation as far as meas uring 
and dispensing is concerned. The smart meters were introduced to measure 
dispensing of accurate quantity of the product. The display units turned to digital by 

33 
 
introduction of digital technology in manufacturing of the fuel dispensing machines. 
This ensured more confidence in customers that the quantity dispensed is accurate 
and as per their requirement & amount paid.  The above mentioned modernization in 
the fuel dispensing technology in the dispensing machines warranted the change in 
Weight & Measur es rules, which is the statute governing operation of the Fuel 
machines in the Fuel dispensing stations. 
 
3.36. The Committee asked about the details of checking with OTP authentication, 
in response the DoCA informed:  
“A system has been developed for fuel  dispensing machines to authenticate 
and verify for calibration, parts replacement etc. The dual OTP (One -Time 
Password) process involves the generation of two unique passwords for 
added security.  
 
(a) First OTP Generation: The fuel station system generat es the first 
unique OTP. The operator or responsible personnel at the fuel station inputs 
the first OTP into the system to verify their identity.  The first OTP is used to 
authenticate and verify the fuel dispensing machine.  After this step, a second 
OTP is generated. 
 
(b) Second OTP Generation: Another unique OTP is generated by the 
system.  For enhanced security, a different operator or the fuel station system 
itself inputs the second OTP.  The second OTP is used for final authentication, 
ensuring that m ultiple parties are involved in the process for accountability 
and reliability. 
 
The parties involved in the authentication process typically include: 
(a) Fuel Station Operator: The person responsible for fuel dispensing and 
inputting the first OTP. 
(b) Fuel Station System : The automated system at the fuel station that 
generates and verifies the OTPs. 
(c) Second Operator or System : Another operator or the fuel station 
system itself that inputs the second OTP for additional authentication. 

34 
 
… As the current s ystem of OTP seems to be full proof and there is no 
instance of it’s tampering, therefore, there seems to be no need to include a 
third party in the OTP system for further accountability. 
3.37 In the same context, the Committee were further informed as under: 
“The current system of OTP (One -Time Password) authentication for fuel 
dispensing machines is generally considered secure and robust. It adds an 
extra layer of security by requiring a unique code for each transaction, thereby 
reducing the likelihood of unauthorized access or tampering. 
While the OTP system significantly enhances accountability and 
security, no system can be considered completely infallible.  However, there 
seems to be no need to include a third party in the OTP system for further 
accountability.  
Fuel station operators and the fuel station system are playing a 
significant role in representing consumer interests in various ways. Here are 
some of them in which they contribute to consumer representation:  
(i)    Price Transparency : Fuel sta tion operators display accurate and 
transparent information about fuel prices to ensure that consumers are 
informed about the costs.  
(ii)   Product Quality: Operators are accountable for ensuring the quality of 
the fuel they dispense. Consumers rely on fu el stations to provide clean and 
uncontaminated fuel that meets established standards, safeguarding their 
vehicles from damage. 
(iii)  Compliance with Rules : Operators are complying with rules related to 
fuel dispensing. Adherence to these rules helps safe guard consumer rights 
and ensures the correct quantity. 
(iv)  Technological Innovations : The adoption of secure and consumer -
friendly technologies, such as the use of OTP authentication systems, 
demonstrates a commitment to enhancing security and protectin g consumers 
from fraudulent activities at fuel stations. 

35 
 
By prioritizing these aspects, fuel station operators and systems contribute to 
building consumer trust, promoting a positive consumer experience and 
upholding the interests and rights of consumers in the fuel industry.” 
3.38. On being asked about the various mechanisms and strategies that put in 
place to ensure that technological advancements are integrated to the advantage of 
consumer by accommodating technological changes.  The DoCA apprised the 
Committee that: 
“Receiving OTPs in remote areas with weak signal strength may be a 
challenge, as it may lead to delays or failures in delivering the necessary 
authentication code within the target time. To address this issue, several 
attempts and strategies are made and implemented: 
(i)      Network Expansion : With the improvement in infrastructure the 
telecommunication network coverage in remote areas is enhancing to reduce 
connectivity issues. 
(ii)     Alternative Communication Channels : Instead of relying solely on 
SMS for OTP delivery, alternative communication channels such as email, 
etc. are being utilized. This provides flexibility and allows operators to receive 
OTPs through various other channels that are more reliable in low signal 
areas. 
(iii)    Increased Timeout Periods : To accommodate potential delays, the 
validity period of OTPs is extended to provide more time in remote areas to 
receive and input the authentication code, reducing the likelihood of 
authentication failures.” 
 
3.39 The Committee en quired as to whether the Union Government has explored 
the possibility of centralized monitoring of all fuel stations of the country and if so, the 
details thereof.   The Committee were further informed that there have been 
discussions and efforts towards c entralized monitoring of fuel stations, especially in 
terms of technological solutions and digital platforms to enhance transparency and 
efficiency in the fuel industry.  
 

36 
 
3.40 The Committee also enquired if there was any policy for empanelment of 
inspection agencies for fuel stations and if so, the number of such agencies have 
been identified in the region.  On this Committee were apprised that the  verification 
and stamping of dispensing machines at retail outlets is being done by the Legal 
Metrology Depar tments of State Governments every year as per section 24 of the 
Act.  The inspection of these dispensing units at retail outlets is done regularly by the 
Legal Metrology Officers of the State Governments.   The Oil Marketing Companies 
also do checking of th ese machines on regular basis to ensure delivery of correct 
quantity to the consumers. 
3.41. During briefing by representatives of Department of Consumer Affairs, the 
Committee were apprised: 
“… once sealed, the seal cannot be tempered with. We have made t he 
calibration OTP based, so that no hardware or software item can compromise 
the dispensing unit in any way. Similarly family integrity is maintained like 
pulsar, firmware, software, logic cards, the integrity of all these is ensured” 

37 
 
      CHAPTER IV 
Regulatory Framework for Weights & Measures 
(i) Overview 
4.1  Regarding the details of regulatory Framework for Weights and Measures in 
India, the Committee were apprised that t he regulatory framework for weights and 
measures in India is established to ensur e accuracy, fairness and transparency in 
trade transactions. It encompasses the Legal Metrology Act and rules that govern 
the use of measuring instruments, pre -packaged commodities and other related 
aspects. The primary legislation governing weights and me asures in India is the 
Legal Metrology Act, 2009 and rules framed thereunder. The regulatory framework 
involved: 
(i) Legal Metrology Act, 2009:  This was the central legislation that 
provided the legal foundation for regulating weights, measures and other 
goods sold by weight, measure or number in India. The act aimed to ensure 
the protection of consumers from unfair trade practices and maintain 
uniformity and accuracy in measurements. It covered various aspects, 
including standards, units of measurement, labelling and verification. 
(ii) Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011: These rules 
are framed under the Legal Metrology Act and regulate the packaging and 
labelling of pre -packaged commodities. They specify requirements for the 
declaration of n et quantity, mandatory information on labels and packaging 
standards. 
(iii) Legal Metrology (General) Rules, 2011:  These rules provide detailed 
guidelines for various aspects of weights and measures, including standards 
of weights and measures, specificati ons for various weighing &measuring 
instruments and testing, verification and other conditions for their use. 
(iv) Enforcement: The enforcement of weights and measures rules was 
carried out by State’s Legal Metrology Departments. These Departments are 
responsible for inspecting and verifying measuring instruments, ensuring 
compliance with packaging rules and taking action against violations. 

38 
 
(v) Indian Institute of Legal Metrology (IILM):  IILM was an institution 
that provides training, research and capacity -building in the field of legal 
metrology to professionals, Legal Metrology Officers and stakeholders. 
(vi) Weighing and Measurement Equipment:  The regulatory framework 
covers various types of weighing and measurement equipment, including 
scales, weighing machines, meters, measuring tapes etc. 
(vii) Verification and Stamping:  Legal metrology authorities conducted 
verification and stamping of measuring instruments to ensure their accuracy 
and compliance with rules. The verification process involved checking and 
certifying instruments for use in trade. 
4.2 Overall, the regulatory framework for weights and measures in India aims to 
create a level playing field for businesses, protect consumer rights and maintain 
integrity in trade transactions. It establishes r ules, guidelines and enforcement 
mechanisms to ensure that measurements are accurate and transparent across 
various sectors and industries. 
4.3 On being asked about the Legal Provisions specifying the manner of using the 
instruments, the Committee were app rised that t he Legal Metrology Act, 2009, and 
rules made thereunder lay down the provisions specifying the manner of using 
weighing and measuring instruments. These provisions ensure that measuring 
instruments are used accurately, transparently and in a wa y that prevents unfair 
trade practices. The key legal provisions related to the use of weighing and 
measuring instruments are: 
 (i) Legal Metrology Act, 2009:  
(a) Section 24: Provisions for Verification and stamping of weight or 
measure: 
(1) Every person having any weight or measure in his possession, custody 
or control in circumstances indicating that such weight or measure is being, or 
is intended or is likely to be, used by him in any transaction or for protection, 
shall, before putting such weight or m easure into such use, have such weight 
or measure verified at such place and during such hours as the Controller 
may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf, on payment of such 
fees as may be prescribed. 

39 
 
(2)  The Central Government may prescri be the kinds of weights and 
measures for which the verification is to be done through the Government 
approved Test Centre. 
(3)  The Government approved Test Centre shall be notified by the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, in such manner, 
on such terms and conditions and on payment of such fee as may be 
prescribed. 
(4)  The Government approved Test Centre shall appoint or engage 
persons having such qualifications and experience and collect such fee on 
such terms and conditions for the verification of weights and measures 
specified under sub-section (2) as may be prescribed. 
(b) Section 25: Prohibited the use of non-standard weights or measures  
 
(c) Section 27: Prohibited the manufacture or sale of non -standard weight 
or measure 
 
(d) Section 33: Prohibited the use of unverified or unstamped weighing or 
measuring instruments  
 
(ii) Legal Metrology (General) Rules, 2011: 
 
(a) Rule 17: Prohibition on sale of non-standard weight or measure  
 
(b) Rule 27: Provides for periodical verification of weights and measures  
 
(iii) Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011: 
 
(a) Rule 6 : Provides for the manner of declaration of net quantity, MRP 
and other mandatory declarations on packaged commodities ensuring 
accurate information for consumers. 
 
(b) Rule 7: Provides the manner of labeling, including font size, etc. 
 

40 
 
(iv) Penalties for Non-Compliance: The Legal Metrology Act provides for 
penalties in case of non -compliance with the provisions related to the use of 
weighing and measuring  instruments. Penalties may include fines or 
imprisonment. 
 
It is to state that the legal provisions mentioned above aim to ensure 
fair trade practices, consumer protection and accuracy in measurements. 
Businesses and individuals involved in trade must com ply with these 
provisions to maintain transparency and integrity in commercial transactions. 
 
(ii) Enforcement Mechanism   
4.4 The Committed asked DoCA to apprise them about Enforcement Mechanism.  
The Committee were informed that t he enforcement mechanisms of legal metrology 
were designed to ensure compliance with the Legal Metrology Act, 2009, and rules 
made thereunder. These mechanisms involved regulatory authorities responsible for 
monitoring and regulating various aspects of weights and measures to pre vent unfair 
trade practices and protect consumer interests. The key components of the 
enforcement mechanisms are: 
(i) Department of Consumer Affairs:  The Department of Consumer 
Affairs, under the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, 
is the nodal agency responsible for formulating policies, laws and rules related 
to legal metrology in the country and provides overall direction and guidance 
for the enforcement of legal metrology standards.   It coordinates the 
development of legal metrol ogy standards, training programs and policy 
formulation. 
 
(ii) State Legal Metrology Departments:  Each state in India has its own 
State Legal Metrology Department responsible for enforcing weights, 
measures and packaging rules within the State's jurisdicti on. These 
Departments monitor and regulate various aspects of trade, including 
measurement accuracy, packaging and labeling. 
 
(iii) Inspection and Verification: Legal metrology authorities conduct 
regular inspections of businesses, industries and trade est ablishments to 

41 
 
ensure compliance with legal metrology regulations. This includes verifying 
the accuracy of weighing and measuring instruments, checking packaging 
standards and ensuring proper labeling. 
 
(iv) Sampling and Testing: Legal Metrology authoritie s take samples of 
pre-packaged commodities for testing to verify compliance with labeling and 
net quantity requirements. Non-compliance may lead to penalties. 
 
(v) Seizure and Legal Action: In cases of violations or repeated non -
compliance, regulatory auth orities have the power to seize non -compliant 
instruments, goods, or packages. Legal action, including fines and penalties, 
may be imposed on businesses that do not adhere to legal metrology rules. 
 
(vi) Consumer Complaint Mechanism: Legal metrology depart ments 
have mechanisms for consumers to file complaints related to inaccurate 
measurements, incorrect labeling or other violations. These complaints are 
investigated, and appropriate action is taken. 
 
(vii) Awareness and Education: Legal Metrology authoriti es also play a 
role in educating businesses, traders, and consumers about their rights and 
responsibilities under legal metrology rules. Awareness campaigns and 
training programs are conducted to promote understanding and compliance. 
 
(viii) Collaboration with Industry: Legal Metrology authorities collaborate 
with industry associations, manufacturers, and trade bodies to promote 
understanding of legal metrology requirements and facilitate compliance. 
 
(ix) Use of Technology: Increasingly, technology is being used to facilitate 
enforcement mechanisms such as digitalization of all services provided by 
Legal Metrology. 
 
The enforcement mechanisms aim to create a level playing field for 
businesses, protect consumers from unfair trade practices and ensure that 
measuring instruments and pre-packaged goods meet accurate standards.  
 

42 
 
(iii) Penalties for Non-Compliance  
4.5 Regarding Penalties and legal consequences for non -compliance, the 
Committee were informed that the n on-compliance with the Legal Metrology Act, 
2009, and rules made thereunder may lead to various penalties and legal 
consequences. The severity of penalties depends on the nature of the violation, the 
extent of non -compliance and whether the violation is a first -time offense or a 
repeated one. The pot ential penalties and legal consequences for non -compliance 
were: 
(i) Fines: One of the common consequences of non -compliance is the 
imposition of fines. The Legal Metrology Act specifies fines for different types 
of violations, which may vary based on the severity of the offense.  
 
(ii) Imprisonment: For serious violations or repeated non -compliance, 
imprisonment may be imposed by the competent court of law. The term of 
imprisonment may vary. 
iii) Seizure of Goods or weighing & measuring Instruments: Legal 
Metrology authorities may seize non -compliant weighing and measuring 
instruments, pre-packaged goods or commodities. 
 
(iv) Confiscation of Non -Standard Instruments: Instruments that do not 
conform to legal metrology standards and have been used for trade m ay be 
confiscated. 
 
(v) Publication of Offense:  In some cases, details of non -compliance, 
including the name and address of the violator, may be published.  
 
It was stated that legal consequences for non -compliance may vary 
depending on the specific provis ions violated and the intent behind the 
violation. The act and rules also outline the procedures for initiating legal 
action and conducting trials in cases of non-compliance. 
 
 
 

43 
 
(iv) Regulatory Authority  
4.6 Regarding the role of the Regulatory Authoritie s, DoCA  informed the 
Committee that the Regulatory Legal Metrology Authorities in India play a crucial role 
in ensuring fairness, transparency and accuracy in trade transactions by enforcing 
the provisions of the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 and rules made th ereunder. These 
authorities were responsible for regulating weights, measures and other goods sold 
or distributed by weight, measure or number.  Their role is as follows: 
“(i) Enforcement of Standards:  Legal Metrology Authorities are 
responsible for enforc ing standards of weights and measures. They ensure 
that measuring instruments used in trade, such as weighing & measuring 
instrument meet specified accuracy and other requirements.  
(ii) Verification and Stamping:  They conduct regular verification and 
stamping of weighing and measuring instruments to ensure their accuracy. 
This process involves testing, adjusting and certifying instruments for use in 
trade. Verification is performed at regular intervals to maintain accuracy. 
(iii) Inspections: Regulatory au thorities conduct inspections of 
businesses, industries and trade establishments to ensure compliance with 
legal metrology laws. They check for accurate measurements, proper labeling 
and adherence to mandatory packaging requirements. 
(iv) Sampling and Test ing: Authorities collect samples of pre -packaged 
commodities to test for compliance with labeling and net quantity 
requirements. This helps ensure that consumers receive the correct quantity 
and information required for informed choice. 
(v) Consumer Complaints: They address consumer complaints related to 
inaccurate measurements, incorrect labeling or other violations of legal 
metrology laws. Complaints are investigated and appropriate action is taken 
to resolve issues. 
(vi) Awareness and Education:  Authorities conduct awareness 
campaigns, training programs and workshops to educate businesses, traders 
and consumers about legal metrology laws and their rights & responsibilities. 

44 
 
(vii) Penalties and Legal Action:  In cases of non -compliance with legal 
metrology laws, authorities impose fines and take legal action against 
violators. These penalties may vary based on the severity of the violation. 
Overall, the role of Legal Metrology Authorities was to safeguard 
consumer interests, maintain fair trade practices and  uphold the integrity of 
measurements and transactions. Their efforts contribute to building consumer 
confidence, ensuring accurate measurements and preventing fraud and unfair 
practices in the marketplace.” 
 
4.7. Section 1 (9) of the Consumer Protection A ct, 2019 lays down various rights 
of the consumers, which are enumerated as under: 
i) the right to be protected against the marketing of goods, products or 
services which are hazardous to life and property; 
ii) the right to be informed about the quality, quantity , potency, purity,  
standard and price of goods, products or services, as the case may be, so 
as to protect the consumer against unfair trade practices; 
iii) the right to be assured, wherever possible, access to a variety of goods, 
products or services at competitive prices; 
iv) the right to be heard and to be assured that consumer's interests will 
receive due consideration at appropriate fora; 
v) the right to seek redressal against unfair trade practice or restrictive trade 
practices or unscrupulous exploitation of consumers; and 
vi) the right to consumer awareness. 
4.8. The Committee were also informed as follows:- 
“OMCs have taken various measures to ensure transparency in the operation 
of Fuel stations which in turn resulted in building Consumer Trust. Some of 
the measures taken in this regard are as below: 
a. Quality and Quantity of Petrol and Diesel is checked on a daily basis by 
the Dealers and a record is maintained. Consumers / customers, at their 
will can also check Quantity and Quality of the product being dispensed a t 
the fuel stations. For this purpose, a calibrated 5-liter measure (for quantity 

45 
 
check) and certified Hydrometer and Thermometer (for Quality Check) are 
available at the Fuel stations. 
b. Dealers are required to display the opening Stock of Petrol and Diesel  on 
daily basis at their outlets. Retail Selling price of Petrol, Diesel and 
Branded Fuels (if facility is available at the fuel Station) are displayed on 
stock Boards at the Fuel Stations. In addition, the Retail selling prices are 
also displayed on individual Dispensing Unit at the retail outlets.  
c. Individual OMCs have implemented their Standard Operating practices at 
the retail outlets whereby the deliverymen at dispensing units have been 
advised to Show “0” before the delivery is started. 
d. The name and t elephone number of the dealer and the concerned sales 
Officer are displayed at Fuel Stations for any assistance for the 
consumers.  
e. Daily Stock / Sales Registers and Density registers are maintained by the 
dealers and are available at the fuel station for the purpose of inspection 
by any competent Inspecting agency. 
f. Complaint / Suggestion books are available at all the Fuel Stations for 
consumers who may raise their grievances w.r.t the facilities / services / or 
any other issue. Customers can also log thei r complaints / grievances 
online with respective OMCs. 
g. OMCs have adopted technological measures for better monitoring of RO 
operation through automation of all active Retail Outlets. All active Retail 
Outlets (Fuel Stations) have been/are being automated f or better 
monitoring of RO operation.  The product receipts and issues at Retail 
Outlets are monitored by automation to prevent malpractices. The 
transaction records of RO are available for any future reference. Thus, 
automation by OMCs is a technological d eterrent for wrong practices 
(malpractices) at retail outlets. 
h. Samples of Petrol and Diesel are also drawn, at random, from petrol 
pumps and sent for testing to authorized laboratories. In case it is 
established that sample test reports do not match with t he standards, 

46 
 
appropriate stringent action is taken against the erring dealers / transport 
contractor, as applicable.  
i. Tankers are being sealed before leaving Company premises to protect 
against pilferage en -route. A temper proof locking system has been 
introduced in tank trucks delivering petrol / diesel at retail outlets. Tank 
Trucks are also installed with VTS to track the movement / deviation from 
assigned path, of tank trucks. 
j. Regular inspection of retail outlets is carried out by IOC field officers/Sr . 
officers throughout the country. Further surprise inspection of retail outlets 
is also carried out by Quality Reassurance Cell of IOCL. Action is taken on 
established cases of irregularities as per the Marketing Discipline 
Guidelines and Dealership Agree ment. Surprise inspections are also 
carried out by IOCL Mobile labs, wherein samples from retail outlets are 
drawn and tested.” 
 
4.9 Besides the above, OMCs have formulated and implemented Marketing 
Discipline Guidelines (MDG - 2012) for building / improvi ng consumer satisfaction / 
service and also for instituting discipline in operation of Retail Outlet Dealerships. 
This has helped to ensure the following:  
 “Dealers dispense and customers receive products of the right quality and 
quantity. 
 Dealers follow c orrect and safe practices in handling and dispensing 
petroleum products. 
 A uniform code of conduct and discipline is enforced throughout the 
dealership network.” 

47 
 
PART – II 
Observations and Recommendations 
1. The Committee observe that in achieving goal of  fair practices, the 
authorities and stakeholders face many challenges like accurate 
measurement, tempering and fraud, lack of regular inspection, consumer 
awareness, difficulties in remote monitoring, technological advancement and 
complex supply chain etc .  In Committee’s view, in order to address these 
challenges and ensure fair practices at fuel stations, it is essential for Central 
and State regulatory authorities, fuel retailers, consumer advocacy groups and 
technology providers to work in better coord ination.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should make efforts to bring all 
these stakeholders on a single platform and establish a coordination 
mechanism involving representatives of all the stakeholders for regulation of 
fair pract ices with regard to weights and measures relating to dispensing 
machines at fuel stations. 
2. The Committee understand that Legal Metrology Act 2009 aims to 
establish standards for weights and measures and regulate trade and 
commerce concerning goods sold or distributed by weight, measure or 
number.  The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Government in amending 
the provisions of Legal Metrology Act through Jan Vishwas (Amendment of 
Provisions) Act, 2023 that has a significant legislative development.  The 
Committee consider that the amendment in various sections of Legal 
Metrology Act 2009 with regard to penalty sections is a praiseworthy effort of 
the Government.   
The Committee are confident  that under ‘The Jan Vishwas (Amendment 
of Provisions) Act, 2 023’  the decriminalization of large number of minor 
offences and replacing them with monetary penalties  will have long term 
impact in the country .  The Committee firmly believe that t he Act would not 
only make lives and businesses easier , deter non -compliance, promote fair 
trade practices, but also reduce judicial burden  at large.  The Committee hope 
that the Government shall ensure the implementation of the Act in letter and 
spirit so that all these objectives are achieved. 

48 
 
3. The Committee note that Advancements in technology have significantly 
impacted weighing and measuring instruments in India over the last decade. 
These advancements have improved accuracy, efficiency and transparency in 
trade transactions. They also note that Oil Marketing Companies ( OMC) have 
upgraded their fuel dispensers to meet the updated security features 
stipulations from Legal Metrology and that all new procurements are done as 
per the latest security upgrades. The Committee further note with appreciation 
that all dispenser con figurations are tested thoroughly for software and 
hardware integrity and security features at Centre for Development of 
Advanced Computing (CDAC), Government of India before deployment in 
Retail Outlets (RO). They hope that the Government and the OMCs wil l 
continue their collaborative exercise so as to uphold the interests of 
consumers. They also desire that while patronizing the existing technological 
breakthroughs, the Government should consistently encourage more research 
to keep pace with the march of technology. 
4. The Committee note that OMCs have implemented their Standard 
Operating practices at the Retail Outlets (ROs) whereby the deliverymen at 
dispensing units have been advised to Show “0” before the delivery is started 
and that the customers visi ting fuel stations are made to stand in such a way 
that they can see the display screen directly and that staff at the fuel stations 
request the customers to see “Zero” display on the screen to ensure fair 
transaction at fuel stations.  They also note that  Complaint / Suggestion books 
are available at all the Fuel Stations for consumers who may raise their 
grievances w.r.t the facilities / services / or any other issue. While appreciating 
the existence of consumer grievance Redressal system in the Retail Ou tlets 
(ROs), the Committee desire that the mandate of consumer’s right to be 
protected in all possible ways.  The Committee understand that customers 
visiting fuel stations don’t have much time for seeking Redressal of 
grievances and on many of the retail outlets, vehicles are made to park in such 
a way that the fuel vent of cars remain adjacent to the pipes  which causes 
display screen slightly behind the driver’s seat and a bit higher for driver’s 
sight.   The Committee, therefore, desire that necessary directions should be 
issued so that display screen at dispensing machines are placed to  be made 

49 
 
visible to the driver and if need be , a longer fuel pipe should be used for 
fuelling the vehicles.  
5. The Committee note that the regulatory framework for weight s and 
measures in India is established to ensure accuracy, fairness and 
transparency in trade transactions.  It encompasses the LM Act and rules that 
govern the use of measuring instruments etc. while acknowledging the 
significant progress made in these ar eas.  The Committee understand that 
there might still be ongoing challenges and opportunities for further 
enhancement in the regulatory landscape of legal metrology  in the country .   
Therefore, the Committee desire that regulatory landscape need to be adap ted 
to the changes  of modern times  to ensure that advancements are harnessed 
effectively while safeguarding consumer interests and maintaining fair trade 
practices.  The Committee may be apprised accordingly. 
6. The Committee note that there has been a shi ft towards the adoption of 
digital solutions and technology for the process of verification, inspection and 
monitoring of weighing and measuring instruments. The Committee desire that 
a system should be constructed wherein all fuel dispensed should be  
monitored and any irregularities in the process be reported instantly to the 
concerned agencies. As Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA) is 
authorized to regulate matters relating to violation of rights of consumers and 
unfair trade practices , the Committee, therefore, recommend  that in the event 
of such irregularity in the fuel station, an instant alert should go to the agency, 
i.e. the CCPA for its necessary action.  
7. The Committee observe that Legal Metrology is the application of legal 
requirements to measurements and measuring instruments to ensure public 
guarantee from the point of view of security and accuracy of the weighments 
and measurements, to builds confidence in trade, industry & consumer and to 
create harmonious environment for conductin g business. They also note that 
Section 24 provides for verification and stamping of weight or measure.  The 
Act encompasses various aspects related to metrology, verification and 
stamping of instruments, enforcement and penalties, consumer protection, 
etc. Being covered under the ambit of Legal Metrology Act, 2009, the fuel 
dispensing pumps also adhere to the standards, thus exhibiting consistency 

50 
 
and reliability in their measuring system ensuring protection of consumer 
interests at fuel stations. The Committee hope that while implementing the Act, 
the Government will ensure public guarantee from the point of view of 
accuracy of the weighments and measurements so as to create a harmonious 
atmosphere for trade and industry to flourish and at the same time to build 
consumer trust. 
 
8. The Committee note that Fuel pump calibration is crucial to 
safeguarding the consumer interest and a slight variation of millilitres in the 
amount of fuel being dispensed can add up to several litres of fuel being 
under-dispensed or over-dispensed. The Committee also learn that calibration 
of fuel dispensing units is done once in 12 months.  Also, t he Government 
have come up with a unique temper proof technology for such calibration 
which involves secure and consumer-friendly technologies, such as the use of 
OTP authentication systems involving fuel station operator, fuel station 
system and second operator or system and demonstrates a commitment to 
enhancing security and protecting consumers from fraudulent activities at fuel 
stations. To accommodate potential delays in remote areas with weak signal 
strength, the validity period of OTPs is extended to provide more time in 
remote areas to receive and input the authentication code, reducing the 
likelihood of authentication failures. Wh ile the OTP system significantly 
enhances accountability and security.  In this regard, t he Committee , 
therefore, recommend that the Government should ensure the scrupulous 
adherence to the OTP system and meanwhile explore the possibility of roping 
in other advance technology for yearly calibration of dispensing machines. 
9. The Committee observe that there have been discussions and efforts 
towards centralized monitoring of fuel stations, especially in terms of 
technological solutions and digital platforms to enhance transparency and 
efficiency in the fuel industry. The Committee applaud the Government for 
conducting a round table workshop on “measurement of petroleum products 
and related issues” which was held on 09.06.2023 with stakeholders’ viz. 
representatives of Oil Marketing Companies, representatives of the Petroleum 
Dealers Associations, Controllers of Legal Metrology of all States/ UTs, 
representative of Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C -DAC) 

51 
 
and Forest College & Research Institute (FCR I), etc.  The Committee note with 
satisfaction that v arious issues of the Petroleum Retail Outlet Dealers were 
resolved during the workshop. The Committee also note that  a meeting with 
Petroleum Dealers Associations, Oil Marketing Companies and State Legal  
Metrology Departments of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu 
was held on 29.9.2023 to discuss and resolve the issues of petroleum dealers 
and to ensure the correct quantity to the consumers. The Committee therefore 
desire that a concrete plan  to monitor the functioning of the Retail Outlets all 
over the country should be brought out in a time bound phased manner.  The 
Committee may also be apprised about the progress made in this direction.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;          LOCKET CHATTERJEE, 
06 February, 2024                Chairperson, 
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka)                                  Standing Committee on  
           Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
  
 
 
 

52 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022 -2023) 
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 26 JULY, 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. in Committee Room 'B', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Locket Chatterjee  - Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
4. Ms. Debasree Chaudhuri 
5. Shri Anil Firojiya 
6. Shri Khagen Murmu 
7. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
8. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
9. Dr. Amar Singh 
10. Smt. Himadri Singh 
11. Smt. Kavita Singh 
12. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
13. Shri Ve. Vaithilingam 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey  
15. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
16. Shri Rajmani Patel 
17. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
18. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Mohit Rajan   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Dong Lianthang Tonsing - Deputy Secretary 
 

53 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the  
Committee convened to have briefing by the representatives of the Department of 
Consumer Affairs on the subject 'Regulation of Weights and Measures with specific 
reference to Dispensing Machines at Fuel Stations'. 
 
[The witnesses were then called in.] 
 
3.  The Chairperson then welcomed the representatives of Department of 
Consumer Affairs to the sitting and apprised them about Direction 55 (1) of the 
'Directions by the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. Thereafter, 
the witnesses introduced themselves and then the representatives of the Department 
of Consumer Affairs briefed the Committee on various aspects of the subject 
'Regulation of Weights and Measures with specific reference to Dispensing 
Machines at Fuel Stations' with the help of power point presentation. The main 
issues covered, inter-alia, included the Constitutional Provisions, the Specific 
Provisions under the Legal Metrology Act, 2009, the New Technologies, Recent 
Developments, New Initiatives, Maximum and Minimum Permissible Error in the 
Dispensing Machines at Fuel Stations, Advisories/ directions issued to prevent 
tampering like E -sealing of Dispensing Units, Tower Calibration at Terminal/ Depot 
and Tank Lorry Calibration, etc. The queries raised by the Acting Chairperson and  
the Members on various issues during the course of briefing were responded to by 
the witnesses. 
Sl 
No. 
Name Designation 
1. Smt. Nidhi Khare  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Vineet Mathur Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Anupam Mishra Joint Secretary 
4. Dr. Kamkhenthang Guite Economic Adviser 
5. Shri Shashi Bhushan Adviser Cost 
6. Shri Aman Jain Director (P&C) 
7. Dr. A.K. Sharma  Director (LM) 
8. Dr. N. Natarajan Director (NIC) 

54 
 
 
4.  The Hon'ble Chairperson then thanked the representatives of Department of 
Consumer Affairs for briefing the Committee and directed them to furnish informa tion 
to the Committee on the issues that remained unanswered/partially answered and 
also some further clarifications in connection with detailed examination of the 
subject. 
 
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
******** 
 

55 
 
APPENDIX – II 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS , FOOD  AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION ( 2023-2024) HELD 
ON TUESDAY, 12 DECEMBER, 2023 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room No. 1, 
Extension to Parliament House Annexe, ‘A’ Block, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Smt. Locket Chatterjee  - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed 
3. Shri Khagen Murmu 
4. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
5. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
6. Dr. Amar Singh 
7. Smt. Himadri Singh 
8. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
9. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
10. Shri Vaithilingam Ve. 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
12.  Shri Baburam Nishad 
13. Shri Rajmani Patel 
14. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
15. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai           -           Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi                             -           Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan    - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dong Lianthang Tonsing  -  Deputy Secretary 

56 
 
WITNESSES 
 
2. At the outset, the Ch airperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to have oral evidence of the representatives of the Department 
of Consumer Affairs on the subject ‘Regulation of Weights and Measures with 
specific reference to Dispensing Machines at Fuel Stations’. 
 [The witnesses were then called in.] 
 
3. The Chairperson then welcomed the representatives of Department of 
Consumer Affairs to the sitting and apprised them about Direction 55 (1) of the 
'Directions by the Speaker' regarding confidentiali ty of the proceedings. Thereafter, 
the witnesses introduced themselves and then the representatives of the Department 
of Consumer Affairs briefed the Committee on various aspects of the subject 
‘Regulation of Weights and Measures with specific reference to  Dispensing 
Machines at Fuel Stations’ with the help of power point presentation. The main 
issues covered, inter-alia, included the Consumer Focus, Legal Metrology - Quantity 
Assurance, Legal Metrology Act, 2009 and Rules framed thereunder, Balance 
between Consumer and Industry, Legal Metrology for Atmanirbhar Bharat, Time 
Dissemination, India becoming an OIML Certificates Issuing Authority, Mandatory 
compliances for W&M instrument including fuel dispensing machines, Nature of 
offences and Penalties prescrib ed, Regulatory Agencies for Dispensing Machines at 
Sl 
No. 
Name Designation 
1. Shri Rohit Kumar Singh 
Secretary (DoCA) 
2. Shri Shantmanu AS&FA 
3. Shri I.S. Negi Sr. Economic Advisor 
4. Shri Vineet Mathur Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Shashi Bhushan Adviser (Cost) 
6. Shri Aman Jain Director 
7. Shri Ashutosh Agrawal Incharge-Director 

57 
 
Fuel Stations, Maximum Permissible Error, Advisories/ directions issued to prevent 
tampering, Workshops held at Delhi and Madurai, Meeting with State Governments 
Legal Metrology, Oil Marketing Companies (O MCs) & Retail Outlets (RO) Dealers, 
etc. The queries raised by the Members on various issues during the course of 
briefing were responded to by the witnesses.  
4. The Hon'ble Chairperson then thanked the representatives of Department of 
Consumer Affairs for deposing before the Committee and directed them to furnish 
information to the Committee on the issues that remained unanswered/partially 
answered and also some further clarifications in connection with detailed 
examination of the subject. 
[The Witnesses then withdrew.] 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 
 
 
 
 

58 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023 -24) HELD ON 
TUESDAY, 6TH FEBRUARY, 2024 
The Committee sat from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, Room No. 
140, Third Floor, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Smt. Locket Chatterjee  -    Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed 
4. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
5.  Shri Khagen Murmu 
6. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
7. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
8. Dr. Amar Singh 
9.  Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
10.  Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
11.  Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
12.  Dr. Fauzia Khan 
13.  Shri Baburam Nishad 
14.  Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                          - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

59 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Mem bers to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft 
Reports: 
(i) Draft Report on the subject, ‘Regulation of Weights and Measures with 
specific reference to Dispensing Machines at Fuel Stations ’ pertaining 
to the Department of Consumer Affairs; 
(ii)        XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the Draft Reports. 
4. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted both the Draft Reports 
without any amendments/modifications.  
5.  The Committee then authorized Hon’ble Chairperson to finalize the report and 
present/lay the same in both Houses of Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
XXXXX Matter does not relate to the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 