 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
 AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-2024) 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
TRANSFORMING FAIR PRICE SHOPS 
 
 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
          February 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
40 


 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-2024) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
TRANSFORMING FAIR PRICE SHOPS 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.02.2024 
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 07.02.2024 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
February 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
  CONTENTS 
  Page 
No. 
 Composition of the Committee  iii 
 Introduction iv 
 REPORT  
I Introductory 
(i)  An Overview of Department of  Food and Public 
Distribution 
(ii)     Public Distribution System (PDS) 
 
1 
II National Food Security Act, 2013 vis-a-vis Fair Price Shops 
 
3 
III Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) vis-a-vis Fair 
Price Shops 
(i)     Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) 
(ii)     One Nation One Ration Card Plan 
 
6 
 
 IV Fair Price Shops 
(i)       Overview 
(ii)      FPS Automation: Objectives & Progress  
 
9 
 
 V Transforming Fair Price Shops 
 
(i) Collaboration and linkages with other 
Ministries/Departments for transforming Fair Price 
Shops 
(ii)      Model Fair Price Shops (FPS) and construction of 
FPSs    under MGNREGA 
 (iii)    MUDRA loans to FPS dealers for capital augmentation 
 
(iv)      District-level CSC awareness workshops for FPS 
dealers 
(v)       Increase sale of non-PDS commodities at FPSs 
(vi)      India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) 
(vii)     Skill training to FPS Dealers 
19 

 
 
 
 
  
(viii)     Other efforts 
(ix)       Roadmap 
 
 VI Vigilance Committees 27 
 VII Challenges and Initiatives 30 
 Part II  
 Observations/Recommendations  31 
ANNEXURES  
I Coverage of beneficiaries under the National Food Security   
Act 
37 
II State-wise list of CSC-IDs created 2013 40 
III Statement indicating Essential commodities distributed by 
State Governments in addition to wheat, rice, coarse -grain, 
sugar and SKO through PDS outlets 
 
41 
APPEDICES  
1 Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee  (2023-24) 
held on 08.11.2023 
46 
2 Minutes  of the Fourth sitting of the Committee  (2023-24) 
held on 05.12.2023 
49 
3. Minutes  of the Eighth sitting of the Committee  (2023-24) 
held on 06.02.2024 
52 

 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (2023-24) 
 
     Smt. Locket Chatterjee  -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3.  Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4.  Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5.  Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
6.  Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi 
7.  Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed 
8.  Km. Debasree Chaudhuri 
9.   Dr. Amar Singh 
10. Shri Anil Firojiya 
11. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
12. Shri Khagen Murmu 
13. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
14. Shri Subrat Pathak 
15. Smt. Himadri Singh 
16. Smt. Kavita Singh 
17. Shri Nandigam Suresh 
18. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
19. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
20. Shri Vaithilingam Ve. 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
23. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
24. Shri Rajmani Patel 
25. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
26. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
27. Shri Baburam Nishad 
28. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
29.  Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
30   Vacant 
31.  Vacant 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                      -           Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi            -  Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                     -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Veena Luthra                        -           Executive Officer 
 
iii 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs , Food and Public 
Distribution (2023-2024) having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on 
their behalf, present this Fortieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha ) on the subject 
‘Transforming Fair Price Shops ’ pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
2.  The subject was selected by the Committee for examination and report. The 
Committee was briefed on the subject by the representatives of the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution) on 
08.11.2023. Oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution was held on 05.12.2023.   
 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of  Food and Public Distribution) for placing 
before them the detailed written notes on the subject and for furnishing the information to the 
Committee, desired in connection with the examination of the subject.  
 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by t he Committee at their sitting held on       
06.02.2024. 
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                            LOCKET CHATTERJEE, 
06  February, 2024                                    Chairperson, 
17 Magha,1945 (Saka)                                                            Standing Committee on  
      Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
iv 

1 
 
PART I 
             CHAPTER I 
 
           INTRODUCTORY 
 
The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution comes under jurisdiction 
of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution. The Ministry 
has following two Departments:-  
(a)  Department of Food and Public Distribution; and  
(b)  Department of Consumer Affairs 
 
(i) An Overview of Department of Food and Public Distribution 
 
1.2   The Department of Food and Public Distribution is one of the two Departments 
under the Mi nistry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution. The main objective 
of the Department is to implement the National Food Security Act, 2013, throughout the 
country, to undertake price support operation through efficient procurement of wheat, 
paddy/rice and coarse grains and to strengthen the Targeted Public Distribution 
System. 
1.3   Aligning with the vision i.e., “Ensuring food security for citizens of the country” of 
the Department of Food and Public Distribution,  Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution, one of the main functions of the Department is “ Implementation of 
the Public Distribution System (PDS) with special focus on the poor”. 
 
(ii) Public Distribution System (PDS) 
1.4 The Public Distribution System (PDS) evolved as a s ystem of management of 
scarcity through distribution of food grains at affordable prices. Over the years, PDS has 
become an important part of Government’s policy for management of food economy in 
the country. PDS is supplemental in nature and is not intend ed to make available the 
entire requirement of any of the commodities distributed under it to a household or a 

2 
 
section of the society. PDS is operated under the joint responsibility of the Central and 
the State Governments. The Central Government, through Food Corporation of India 
(FCI), has assumed the responsibility for procurement, storage, transportation and bulk 
allocation of food grains to the State Governments. The operational responsibility 
including allocation within State, identification of eligib le families, issue of Ration Cards 
and supervision of the functioning of Fair Price Shops (FPSs) etc., rest with the State 
Governments. Under the PDS, presently the commodities namely wheat, rice, sugar 
and kerosene are being allocated to the States/UTs fo r distribution. Some States/UTs 
also distribute additional items of mass consumption through the PDS outlets such as 
pulses, edible oils, iodized salt, spices, etc 
1.5   The Department of Food and Public Distribution (DFPD) has made continuous 
efforts to enhance the viability and profitability of Fair Price Shops (FPSs). This initiative 
aims to ensure the long -term viability and sustainability of FPSs while simultaneously 
expanding the range of citizen -centric services offered and improving the overall 
experience for beneficiaries. 
1.6   To enhance the viability and profitability of FPSs, the Central Government has 
undertaken various initiatives for FPS transformation and seeks regular updates on FPS 
transformation activities from the States/UTs for review and monitoring. 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY ACT, (NFSA)  2013 
 VIS-A-VIS FAIR PRICE SHOPS  
 
 
2.1    The Representatives of the Department of Food and Public Distribution 
informed the Committee at their sitting held on 5 th December, 2023 that the  National 
Food Security Act, (NFSA) 2013 provides food and nutritional security in human life 
cycle approach, by ensuring access to adequate quantity of quality foodgrains at 
affordable prices to people to live a life with dignity. The Act came into force w.e.f.    
5th July, 2013 and adopted in all States/UTs by November 2016. 
         
2.2   The Committee asked the Department to share salient features of the 
National Food Security Act, (NFSA) 2013. In response, the Department, in their 
written relies submitted to the Committee as follows: 
(i) Coverage and entitlement under Targeted Public 
Distribution System (TPDS): Upto 75% of the rural population 
and 50% of the urban  population will be covered under TPDS, 
with uniform entitlement of 5 kg per  person per month. 
However, since Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) households  
constitute poorest of the poor, and are presently entitled to 35 
kg per  household per month, entitlement of existing AAY 
households will be protected at 35 kg per household per month. 
 
(ii) State-wise coverage: Corresponding to the all India 
coverage of 75% and 50% in the rural and urban areas 
respectively, State-wise coverage will be determined by the 
Central Government. State-wise coverage has been determined 
by the Planning Commission (now NITI Ayog) on th e basis of  
2011-12 NSSO Household Consumption Expenditure Survey 
data. Coverage of State-wise beneficiaries is at Annexure-I. 
 
(iii) Prices under TPDS and their revision: The Government 
is distributing foodgrains free of cost w.e.f. January, 2022 under 
the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana. 
 
 

4 
 
 
(iv) Tide Over  allocation: In case, any State’s foodgrains 
allocation, based  on the prescribed coverage and entitlements 
under the Act, is lower than  their current allocation, it will be 
protected upto the level of average offtake during 2010 -11 to 
2012-13 under normal TPDS, at prices to be determined by  the 
Central Government. Existing prices for APL households i.e. 
Rs. 6.10 per  kg for wheat and Rs 8.30 per kg for rice has been 
determined as issue prices  for the additional allocation to protect 
the average offtake. 
 
(v) Identiﬁcation of Households: Within the coverage under 
TPDS determined for each State, the work of identiﬁcation of 
eligible households is  to be done by States/UTs. 
 
(vi) Nutritional Support to women and children: Pregnant 
women and lactating mothers and child ren in the age group of 6 
months to 14 years will  be entitled to meals as per prescribed 
nutritional norms under Integrated  Child Development Services 
(ICDS) and Mid -Day Meal (MDM) schemes. Higher  nutritional 
norms have been prescribed for malnourished chi ldren upto 6  
years of age. 
 
(vii) Maternity Beneﬁt: Pregnant women and lactating mothers will 
also be  entitled to receive maternity beneﬁt of not less than 
Rs.6,000 as per scheme  to be formulated by the Central 
Government. 
(viii) Women Empowerment:  Eldest woman of the household of 
age 18 years or above will be the head of the household for the 
purpose of issuing of ration cards. 
 
(ix) Grievance  Redressal  Mechanism: Grievance redressal 
mechanism at the District and State levels. States will have the 
ﬂexibility to use the existing machinery or set up separate 
mechanism. 
 
(x) Cost of intra-State transportation  & handling  of  
foodgrains  and  FPS Dealers' margin: Central Government 
will provide assistance to States in meeting the expenditure 
incurred by them on transportation of foodgrains  within the 
State, its handling and FPS dealers’ margin as per norms 
devised for this purpose. 
 
(xi) Transparency and Accountability:  Provisions have been 
made for disclosure of records relating to PDS, social audits 
and setting up of Vigilance  Committees in order to ensure 
transparency and accountability. 

5 
 
 
(xii) Food Security Allowance: Provision for food security allowance  
to entitled beneficiaries in case of non-supply of entitled 
foodgrains or meals. 
 
(xiii) Penalty: Provision for penalty on public servant or authority, to 
be imposed by t he State Food Commission, in case of failure to 
comply with the  relief recommended by the District Grievance 
Redressal Officer. 

6 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
TARGETED  PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  SYSTEM (TPDS) 
 VIS-A-VIS FAIR PRICE SHOPS  
 
 
(i)   Targeted Public Distribution  System (TPDS)  
 
3.1 When enquired about Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS),  the 
Department in a written reply submitted that  Department of Food and Public 
Distribution implemented Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS), which 
was aimed at the ensuring food security of the people, especially the poor 
and vulnerable sections of the society i.e. Antyodaya families and Below 
Poverty Line families. Thereafter, End-To- End Computerization of TPDS 
operations scheme was also implemented to bring more transparency in the 
entire PDS operations and address issues related to leakages and diversion 
of foodgrains, inclusion and exclusion errors in identiﬁcation of beneﬁciaries 
under TPDS, etc. The Department had   implemented  the  Scheme  in 
association  with  all  States/UTs  on  cost  sharing basis. The key activities of 
the scheme and their expected outcomes were: 
a. Digitization of ration cards/beneﬁciary  database for correct 
identiﬁcation of beneﬁciaries; removal of bogus cards and better 
targeting of  food subsidies. 
 
b. Online allocation of foodgrains towards system generated 
allocation to bring transparency in allocation of foodgrains, up to the Fair 
Price Shops level. 
 
c. Computerisation  of Supply Chain Management for ensuring timely 
availability of foodgrains at all FPSs for delivery to the targeted 
beneﬁciaries and also to check leakage/diversion of foodgrains. 
 
d. Online Grievance Redressal/Toll Free Helplines and  creation  of 
Transparency Portals to introduce transparency and public 
accountability in the implementation of TPDS. 
 

7 
 
 
A snapshot of achievements at the national level is summarised below: 
 
a. All 20.2 Cr. ration cards covering more than 80 Cr. beneﬁciaries under  
NFSA in the country are completely digitized in all States/Uts. 
 
b. Aadhaar seeding of about 99% ration cards and almost 97% 
beneﬁciaries at the national level have been achieved so far. 
 
c. Supply Chain Management of foodgrains has been computerized in 31 
States/Uts (except  in  two  DBT  Cash  implementing  UTs  of  
Chandigarh  and Puducherry. It is not applicable in Lakshadweep). 
 
d. Online allocation of foodgrains up to FPS levels is implemented in all 
States/UTs. (except in two DBT Cash implementing UTs of Chandigarh 
and Puducherry). 
 
e. Online  grievance  redressal  mechanism/toll-free  helplines  and  
transparency portals are setup in all States/UTs. 
 
f. Further, 5.41 Lakh FPSs in the country are automated by installing 
electronic Point of Sale (ePoS) devices. 
 
 (ii)      One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC)  plan 
3.2    The Committee desired to be apprised about One Nation One Ration Card  
(ONORC) plan), the Department in a written reply submitted as follows: 
“Under the Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) reforms, the 
Department has implemented the One Nation One Ration Card 
(ONORC) plan aimed at the nation -wide portability of ration cards 
and beneﬁciaries covered under the National Food Security Act 
(NFSA). 
I. The ONORC plan is a technology driven initiative of the 
Department enabling the access of lesser privileged to their entitled 
ration (food security) anywhere in the country. Through this in itiative, 
the food  security of all 80 Crore NFSA beneﬁciaries has been made 
portable across the country and is proving to be very beneﬁcial to the 
NFSA population who  frequently change their place of dwelling in 
search of temporary employments, etc. 
II. ONORC is an integral part of the Hon’ble Prime Minister’s ‘Technology 
Driven System Reforms’ under the Atma Nirbhar Bharat Abhiyan. 

8 
 
III. ONORC provides an option to the NFSA beneficiaries to lift their entitled 
quota of foodgrains from any FPS of their choice, anywhere in the 
country, by using t h e i r same/existing ration card with 
biometric/Aadhaar  authentication on an electronic Point of Sale 
(ePoS) device installed at the FPSs. It is also noteworthy that the 
families of NFS A beneﬁciary back home,  can also avail the balance 
ration on the same ration card without any difficulty. 
IV. Starting with inter-State portability in just 4 States in August 2019, so far, 
the ONORC plan has been enabled in all 36 States/UTs  (across the 
country) covering around 80 Crore NFSA beneﬁciaries, i.e., almost 
100% NFSA population in the country. 
V. Through the facility of inter-State and intra-State portability of ration 
cards under ONORC, the desirous beneﬁciaries are accessing their 
PMGKAY foodgrains from any FPS of choice, without being 
dependent on the ‘mentioned/tagged’ ration shop in their ration card. 
Such ﬂexibility was  not available earlier under the traditional 
TPDS operations when beneﬁciaries had to lose upon their food 
security beneﬁts in the event of  migration or being away from their 
village/town or designated FPS. 
VI. The key enablers of ONORC are, digitisation of ration cards data, 
Aadhaar seeding of beneﬁciaries with their ration cards, installation of 
ePoS devices at  FPSs and enablement of bi ometrically authenticated 
FPS transactions. The  ration card/beneﬁciary details and the available 
entitlements on the ration  card  are  available  online  on  any  ePoS  
device  from  their  home  State/UT enabling seamless distribution of 
foodgrains to the beneﬁciaries through portable transactions. 
VII. Since inception of ONORC plan in August 2019 to till 08th December, 
2023,  more than 125 Crore portability transactions have been recorded  
under  the  ONORC plan in the country, which includes both inter -State 
and intra-State transactions delivering both regular NFSA and PMGKAY 
foodgrains to the beneficiaries with flexibility. 
VIII.Since inception of the ONORC plan in August 2019 to till                   
08th December, 2023, States/UTs   have   delivered   more than          
241  LMT foodgrains to NFSA beneﬁciaries vide inter -State and intra - 
State portability transactions. 
IX. Since ration cards and thus distribution of ration also has been made 
portable, it has greatly increased the Ease of Living of beneﬁciaries, 
as well as, it has help ed minimizing the compliances / procedural issues 
of such beneficiaries.” 
 

9 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
FAIR PRICE SHOPS 
 
(i)  Overview 
 
4.1   Public Distribution System (PDS) is an important part of the 
Government’s policy for ensuring food security of over 81 Crore 
beneﬁciaries (persons) covered through over 23 Crore ration cards in the 
country issued under the National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) for 
distributing/delivering about 43 LMT of highly subsidised foodgrains, 
namely Rice, Wheat and Coarse -grains through a network of about 5.4 
Lakh Fair Price Shops (FPSs) spread across all States/UTs. The PDS is 
operated under joint responsibilities of the Central and State/UT    
Governments,    wherein    this    Department,    through    Food Corporation 
of India (FCI), has ass umed the responsibility for procurement,  storage,   
transportation   and   bulk   allocation   of   foodgrains   to   States/UTs. 
Whereas, the responsibility of identiﬁcation of eligible 
households/beneﬁciaries,  issuance  of  Ration  Cards,  Aadhaar  seeding,  
FPS- wise allocation and distribution of foodgrains, authentication of 
beneﬁciaries, licensing and monitoring of FPSs, maintenance of all 
databases/records, etc. rest with the respective State/UT Government. 
 
4.2 As per Section 2(4) of National Food Security Act, 2013, Fair Price Shop means 
a shop which has been  licensed to distribute essential commodities by an order issued 
under section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, to the ration card holders 
under the Targeted Public Distribution System. 
4.3 For many years, PDS was plagued with several malpractices which 
prevented the Government benefits (subsidised foodgrains) from reaching 
the intended beneﬁciaries and resulted in major revenue loss for the 
Government. Leakages, pilferages and diversions of subsidised foodgrains  
were reported in the supply chain. Besides, manual PDS operations at the  

10 
 
Godown level, allocation, transportation of foodgrains, and standalone 
register-based   maintenance   of   records   at   the   FPSs/ration   cards   
further couldn’t restrict the FPS dealers and others to indulge in various 
malpractices. 
4.4   Thus, to bring systemic reforms in the functioning of the PDS in the 
country, the D/o Food & Public Distribution in collaboration with all State 
Governments and Union Territories started the implementation of a plan 
scheme on ‘End -to-End Computerization of Targeted Public Distribution 
System (TPDS) Operations’ on cost s haring basis with the respective State/UT 
Governments. The components/activities of the scheme inter -alia include – (i) 
Digitization of ration cards/beneficiary database, (ii) Seeding of Aadhaar 
numbers of beneficiaries with their digitised ration cards dat a (iii) Online 
allocation of foodgrains up to FPS level, (iv) Computerisation of Supply Chain 
Management of foodgrains and (v) Setting up of online grievance redressal 
mechanism, toll -free helplines & transparency portals. Beside these, 
automation of Fair Price Shops (FPS Automation) is also being done in all 
States/UTs for enabling transparent and ensured delivery of foodgrains to 
intended beneficiaries preferably after their biometric/Aadhaar authentication 
for achieving the ‘rightful targeting of food su bsidy’. 
 
(ii)       FPS Automation : Objectives & Progress  
 
4.5   Under PDS reforms, the Department, in collaboration with all 
States/UTs has implemented a scheme on ‘End-to-End 
Computerization of TPDS Operations’.  Under  this  scheme,  ration  
cards/beneﬁciaries  database  have been  completely  digitized  in  all  
States/UTs,  transparency  portal  and  online grievance redressal 
facility/Toll-free number have been implemented in all  States/UTs, online 
allocation has been implemented in all States/UTs (except UTs of 
Chandigarh and Puducherry, which have adopted DBT Cash Transfer  
scheme) and supply chain has been computerized in 31 States/UTs. 

11 
 
Further, the Automation of Fair Price Shops (FPS) is also being done in 
all States/UTs by installing electronic Po int of Sale (ePoS) devices at the 
FPSs for the  distribution of foodgrains in a transparent manner 
(electronically) and for  unique identiﬁcation of genuine beneﬁciaries 
through biometric/Aadhaar authentication on the ePoS device.  This 
Department has also issued advisory  to all the States/UTs to minimize the 
food-security hardships of the poor and vulnerable/needy beneﬁciaries by 
ensuring timely and transparent delivery of foodgrains to NFSA 
beneficiaries. State wise details of ePoS enabled Fair Price Shops (FPSs) 
is given below: 
 

12 
 
State-Wise details of ePoS enabled Fair Price Shops (FPSs) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
State & UTs Total No. of 
FPSs 
ePoS Enabled 
FPSs Percentage 
A&N Islands 416 416 100% 
Andhra Pradesh  29,791 29,791 100% 
Arunachal Pradesh  1,680 1,680 100% 
Assam  34,300 34,286 100% 
Bihar  50,951 50,951 100% 
Chandigarh  NA NA NA 
Chhattisgarh  13,675 13,675 100% 
DNH & Daman & Diu 114 114 ` 100% 
Delhi  1,993 1,993 100% 
Goa  452 452 100% 
Gujarat  16,949 16,949 100% 
Haryana  9,434 9,434 100% 
Himachal Pradesh  5,219 5,155 99% 
Jammu & Kashmir  6,737 6,737 100% 
Jharkhand  25,228 25,228 100% 
Karnataka  20,403 20,325 100% 
Kerala  13,913 13,905 100% 
Ladakh  404 404 100% 
Lakshadweep  39 39 100% 
Madhya Pradesh  27,377 27,127 99% 
Maharashtra  52,642 52,642 100% 
Manipur  2,339 2,339 100% 
Meghalaya  4,735 4,727 100% 
Mizoram  1,258 1,258 100% 
Nagaland  1,783 1,774 99% 
Odisha  12,044 12,044 100% 
Puducherry  NA NA NA 
Punjab  18,150 18,150 100% 
Rajasthan  27,062 25,579 95% 
Sikkim  1,312 1,312 100% 
Tamil Nadu  34,805 34,805 100% 
Telangana  17,246 17,246 100% 
Tripura  2,057 2,057 100% 
Uttarakhand  9,059 9,059 100% 
Uttar Pradesh  79,216 79,216 100% 
West Bengal  20,476 20,476 100% 
National Summary 5,43,259 5,41,345 ~100% 

13 
 
4.6 Objective of FPS automation as under : 
Objective of FPS automation
A mechanism to ensure …
Portability 
Benefits
Quality 
service near 
their 
doorstep
Zero 
Leakages / 
Diversions
Electronic 
recording of 
foodgrain 
distribution
Transparency 
and 
efficiency in 
the system
 
 
4.7 The details of Fair Price Shop (FPS) Automation as submitted by DFPD in their 
background note is as follows : 
 Beside facilitating electronic transactions (for transparency) and biometric 
authentication (for unique identification ) of beneficiaries, the ePoS device also 
transmit/upload the electronically generated data of all sale transactio ns i.e. distribution 
of subsidised foodgrains, to a centralised ePoS -server of the State/UT for FPS wise 
electronic record -keeping and display on respective States/UTs’ transparency 
portals to maintain transparency of distribution in public domain. State/U T wise 
information, up to districts level, is also available on central Annavitran portal  
(https://annavitran.nic.in) which is fetched directly from the States/UTs servers using 
APIs/web-services. 
4.8   Every month, based on number of eligible ration cards/beneficiaries tagged to 
each Fair Price Shop, the State/UT Government generates the FPS -wise allocation 
order as per the entitlements of each ration card in the FPS. The allocation details are 
then pushed electronically to all ePoS devices through a central server and accordingly 

14 
 
the FPS dealers acknowledge the receipt of foodgrains on the ePoS device and 
thereafter distribute the foodgrains to the beneficiaries as per their entitlements. At the 
end of month/distribu tion cycle the FPS -wise closing balances of foodgrains are also 
captured by the central server through these devices.  
4.9   The process of FPS automation involves installation of electronic Point of Sale 
(ePoS) devices at the FPSs by respective States/UTs . For this activity the Department 
in consultation with NIC (Central Technical Partner) and UIDAI has prepared the 
guidelines for FPS automation along with  specifications for  ePoS devices/mobile 
terminals and issued the same to all States/UTs.   
4.10 Since, the operational responsibilities of distribution and authentication of 
beneficiaries’ rest with States/UTs, the States/UTs are required to acquire and install 
ePoS devices in all FPSs either through States’ own or Central procurement 
procedures. In this regard, the Department had suggested the following business 
models to the States/UTs for acquiring the ePoS devices as below –  
a) State Purchased Model:  State/UT Government tenders to purchases and 
provides the ePoS devices to all FPS dealers. 
 
b) System Integr ator Model:  State/UT Government contracts a System 
Integrator (SI)/vendor, through tender process for installation and 
maintenance of ePoS devices in all FPSs. 
 
c) Hybrid Model:  State/UT Government tenders to purchases the ePoS 
devices and to contract a Syste m Integrator/Vendor for the installation and 
maintenance of same in all FPSs. 
 
d) FPS Dealers’ Purchase Model:  FPS dealers purchase and install their own 
ePoS devices.  
4.11   The Department informed the Committee that the joint efforts of this Department 
and States/UTs, have resulted in the operationalisation of e-PoS devices at all about 5.5 
Lakh FPSs. Also, at present, nearly 97% of total monthly ePoS transactions in the 
country (in States/UTs having ePoS devices), are being done after biometric/Aadhaar 
authentication of beneficiaries on a monthly basis . Thus because of ePoS devices 
coupled with Aadhaar seeding in ration cards, the State/UT Governments are able to –  
a) Reduce ineligible lifting of highly subsidized foodgrains. 

15 
 
b) Enable rightful targeting  of food  subsidy i.e., distribution of subsidized 
foodgrains to genuine/real beneficiaries only.  
c) Real-time monitoring of transactions happening at the FPSs and availability of 
transaction details in the Public Domain.  
d) Visibility of FPS-wise stocks on State/UT Portals and Central Dashboard.  
e) Improved transparency  and accountability in last -mile delivery of subsidized 
foodgrains meant for the food security of beneficiaries covered under the Act.  
f) Accuracy in the availability of monthly closing balance and allotment s for the 
subsequent month due to the elimination of manual intervention. 
g) Information dissemination to beneficiaries in terms of actual quantity issued 
and the amount payable by beneficiaries while purchasing of foodgrains through 
ePoS printed receipt, voice announcement, and/or SMSs.  
h) Improved beneficiary satisfaction.  
i) Availability of electronic data for archival and data analytics for detection of 
malpractices/leakages and for bringing continuous improvements in PDS 
operations.  
j) Portability of ration cards (Intra-State and Inter-State). 
                                                                                       
Key benefits realized from FPS automation
Foodgrain distribution 
by Aadhaar bio-
metric/other 
authentication. 
Portability 
(Intra-State and Inter-
State).
Removal of manual 
record keeping in 
register/paper . 
Real-time monitoring 
on State Portal and 
Central Dashboard.
Improved transparency 
and accountability.
Accuracy in closing 
balance and allotment.
Use of weighment for 
electronic recording of 
foodgrain delivery at 
FPSs. 
Electronic recording of 
FPS inspection, 
biometric 
authentication of 
inspection team, etc. 
Dissemination of actual 
quantity and amount to 
beneficiaries while 
purchasing of 
foodgrains through 
receipt, voice and 
SMSs. 
Advanced data analytic 
techniques detected 
wrong 
practices/leakages 
 

16 
 
 
4.12   On the matter of working of e -PoS devices at FPS, the representatives of 
Department deposited before the Committee at their sitting held on 08.11.2023 as 
under :- 
“उनको कम वजन दिया  जाता है। हमार े  अपर  सदिव ने बताया  दक अब हम कोदिि  कर  रहे  हैं दक जो ई-पॉस 
मिीन्स हैं, उनको इंटीग्रेट कर ें  या  उनको ई-वेज स्क े ल से दलंक कर ें । अगर  उनका इलेक्ट् र ॉदनक वेजस्क े ल से 
दलंक होगा, तो दजतना वजन कर  रहे  हैं, ई-पॉसमिीन  की रसीि  में उसका वजन आएगा। अभी ई-पॉस मिीन 
से जो दनकलता है, वह पांि दकलो दलख ि े ता है, तो हम पांि दकलो मान लेते हैं। अगर  वह पांि दकलो से कम 
िे रहा  है, अगर  ई-पॉस मिीन  इलेक्ट् र ॉदनक वेज स्क े ल से दलंक हो जाएगी, यदि  वह िार  दकलो ि े गा, तो रसीि  
में भी िार  दकलो ही आएगा। वह कायय  कई राज्ों  में िल रहा  है। कई राज्ों  ने इसको पूरा  भी कर  दिया  है। 
हम इसी के दलए एदििनल िीलर  मादजिंग भी िे रहे  हैं। स्पेिल क ै टेगेरी स्टेट्स के दलए 26 रुपये  िे रहे  हैं और  
नॉमयल क ै टेगरी स्टेट्स के दलए प्रदतक्व ं टल 21 रुपये  िे रहे  हैं। 
जब हर  राज्  में या  हर  एफपीएस िुकान में यह  लागू हो जाएगा, तो जो कम वजन की दिकायत  आ 
रही  है, वह दिकायत  भी काफी हि तक ि ू र हो जाएगी।“  
 
4.13   It may be summarised that the use of ePoS devices in PDS has resulted in 
enabling sustainable reforms in the overall distribution process of subsidised foodgrains 
under NFSA. The ePoS devices are based on the POS/micro -ATM platform which is 
universally accepted model which is compatible with UIDAI’s approved biometric 
authentication devices such as finger print scanner, IRIS scanner, etc. This platform has 
the capability to be replicated to suit the requirements of any Department/Service by 
installing customised front -end ePoS application software and suitable backend 
application. The same devices can also be used for digitizing the beneficiary data, 
Aadhaar seeding, enabling e-KYC/Authentication, digital payments, etc. 
4.14  As regard ﬁnancial assistance to States/U, this Department  has  
notiﬁed “The Food Security (Assistance  to State Governments)  
Rules 2015”under NFSA which provides for reimbursement of an 
additional FPS dealers’  margin  to  States/UTs  under  NFSA  at  the  rate  of 
Rs.  21 (General State) / Rs. 26 (Special State) per quintal of foodgrains 
distributed through the eP oS devices, over and above the existing FPS 
dealer margin of  Rs. 90 (General State)/ Rs. 180 (Special State) per  
quintal, to meet up the expenditure incurred towards the purchasing cost, 

17 
 
operational/running expenses, maintenance of ePoS devices and 
incentives for their use. Such  expenditure would be shared between Centre 
and State/UT Governments on 75:25 basis for Special Category 
States/UTs and on a 50:50 basis for General Category States/UTs.   
4.15    The Committee asked the Department to furnish the pro gress made so far in 
FPS Automation and future planning in FPS Automation. In response, the Department 
informed that their Department in association with all States/UTs is implementing a 
scheme on ‘End to End Computerization of PDS Operations’ under PDS re forms. The 
scheme includes automation of Fair Price Shop (FPS) by installation of electronic Point 
of Sale (ePoS) devices at FPSs for electronic recording of sale transactions and 
authentication of beneficiaries at the FPS, etc. Out of total 5.43 lakh FPSs  across the 
country, about 5.41 lakh FPSs have been automated so far. 
 
4.16   Progress of FPS Automation (ePoS) and Aadhaar Authentication are shown 
below : 
Progress of FPS Automation and Aadhaar Authentication 
Fair Price Shop 
Automation 
Aadhaar 
Authentication 
3%
42%
50%80%
90%
100%
2015
2016
2017
2020
2019
2021
Progress of FPS Automation (ePoS)
1%
20%
74%
85%
97%
2015
20172021
2019
2023
Progress of Aadhaar Authentication
 
 

18 
 
4.17    On automation of FPS, the representatives of Department d eposited before 
the Committee at their sitting held on 05.12.2023 as under :- 
“हमार े  दजतने भी रािनिॉप्स  हैं, लगभग 5.48 लाख रािन  िॉप्स में ऑटोमेिन का काम समाप्त 
हो गया  है। इसक े अलावा, हर  िुकान में ई-पॉस मिीन के जररए  रािन  दिये  जा रहे  हैं। ऑलमोस्ट 
98 परसेंट  रा िन का दवतरण  आधार  ऑथेंदटक े िन के जररए  हो रहा  है। इसक े अलावा, मनर े गा में 
मॉिल एफपीएस के क ं स्ट र क्शन का काम िुरू  हो गया  है। ‘वन नेिन, वन रािनकािय ’ के तहत 
दकसी भी कोने में, जो भी दहतादधकारी  है, उसको रािनकािय  या  आधार  नम्बर  के माध्यम  से 
रािन  उपलब्ध कराया  जा सकता है । 
 
ि ू सरी बात यह  थी दक हम फ े यर  प्राइस िॉप्स के ऑपर े िंस  क ै से बढ़ाए ं, क ै से वाइदबलेटी बढ़ाए ं? 
उसक े दलए हमने क ु छ काययक्रमों  को हाथ में दलया  था। उसमें कॉमन सदवयस सेंटसय के साथ हमने 
करीब  30,000 फ े यर  प्राइस िॉप्स के दलए एओयू  दकया  है। इंदियन  पेमेंट पोस्ट बैंक के साथ भी 
हमने एमओयू  दकया  है, दजससे जो फ े यर  प्राइस िॉप्स हैं, उन्हें कॉमन सदवयस सेंटसय और  इंदियन  
पेमेंट पोस्ट बैंक की सुदवधाए ं भी इसक े माध्यम  से िी जा रही  हैं। सभी राज्ों  में आज के दिन 
नॉनपीिीएस  कमोदिटीज के दलए भी हमने उनको फ्लेक्िदबलेटी िी है, दक अगर  वे िाहें, तो वे 
नॉनपीिीएस  कमोदिटीज की दबक्री भी कर  सकते हैं।“    
 

19 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
TRANSFORMING FAIR PRICE SHOPS 
 
5.1 Annual Report (2022 -23) of Department has enumerated the following initiatives 
on Fair Price Shops (FPSs) Transformation : 
DFPD has undertake n various technology -based interventions in the Public 
Distribution System (PDS) to improve transparency in operations, prevention of 
leakages, and diversion of foodgrains.  Simultaneously, it has been the endeavour of 
the DFPD to improve the financial via bility of Fair Price Shops (FPS) by providing 
additional business avenues to FPS dealers and enhancing beneficiary satisfaction 
through the provision of value added services at FPS. Consequently, DFPD has 
requested all State/UT governments to implement the  following additional services at 
the FPS: 
  • Common Service Centre (CSC) services 
 • Banking services through a tie-up with banks/ corporate BCs 
 • Banking and citizen-centric services of India Post Payment Bank (IPPB) 
  • Retail selling of small (5kg) LPG cylinders  
• Sale of other commodities/ general store items  
• Converting FPS into a ‘Public Data Office’ under the PM-WANI scheme  
• Providing MUDRA loans to FPS dealers for capital augmentation. 
 In addition, DFPD has been pursuing all States/UT gover nments to implement 
the following initiatives as part of FPS transformation.  
• Installation of Closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras at FPS  
• Linking automatic weighing scales with e-PoS machines 
 • Installation of display/information boards at FPS  
• Uniform branding/ painting of FPS for easy identification 
5.2 The Department in their background note to the meeting held on 5.12.2023 and 
post evidence replies also submitted various initiatives for transforming FPSs which are 
enumerated in the successive paras. 

20 
 
 (i) Collaboration and linkages with other Ministries/Departments       
for transforming Fair Price Shops 
 
5.3   The Department in their background note submitted to the Committee about the 
Collaboration and linkages with other Ministries/Departmen ts for transforming Fair Price 
Shops as under :- 
i. The Department of Food & Public Distribution (DFPD) has strived to 
improve the profitability of Fair Price Shops (FPSs) to ensure their long -
term viability and sustainability, offering a wide range of citize n-centric 
services and an enhanced beneficiary experience. 
 
ii. To strengthen the viability and profitability of FPSs, the department has 
implemented various initiatives for FPS transformation and regularly seeks 
updates on FPS transformation activities from t he States/Union Territories 
for review and monitoring. 
 
iii. DFPD has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with CSC e -
Governance Services India Ltd for the delivery of CSC services in 
consultation with the respective State/UT. 
 
iv. Similarly, DFPD has collabo rated with other ministries/departments, such 
as India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) and the Department of Financial 
Services, to enable FPS dealers to provide additional services. 
 
5.4   The Committee asked the Department to share experience in 
respect to col laboration with other Ministries/Departments. In response, 
the Department, in their written relies submitted to the Committee as 
follows :    
“The collaboration experience with different Ministries/Departments has been 
quite positive and the collaboration has been instrumental in enabling FPS 
dealers to expand their services and offerings, providing credit support for their 
growth and business expansion.” 
 
5.5 In this context, the Representatives of the Department apprised the Committee at 
their sitting held on 05.12.2023 as under: 
“एफपीएस िुकानिार  हैं, उनकी इनकम क ै से बढ़ाई जा सकती है? इसक े दलए हमने एक 
असेसमेंट दकया  था दक उनको क्या -क्या  क्स्कल ट रेदनंग िी जा सकती है? इसमें हमने यह  इनश्योर  

21 
 
दकया  था दक उनका एजुक े िनल लेवल क्या  है? उनक े पास क्या  इनफ्रास्ट र क्चर है और  वे क्या  
करना  िाहते हैं? क्या  वे और  भी दकसी उपयोगी  दबजनेस में आना िाहते हैं? इस बात को लेकर  
हमने एक क्स्कलट रेदनंग की काययिाला  करने  की तैयारी  की है, दजसमें दमदनस्ट र ी ऑफ 
क्स्कलिेवलपमेंट ए ं ि इंटरप्रेनयोरक्पप  के साथ दमलकर  हमने एक कररक ु लम बनाने की कोदिि  
की है। इसमें खानगी क्षेत्र की जो िो क ं पदनयां  – मेटा और  वाधवानी फाउ ं िेिन, इन िोनों 
क ं पदनयों  के साथ हमारी  ििाय िालू है, दजनक े साथ हम एक कररक ु लम और  कोसय दिजाइन 
कर ें गे। इस ऑनलाइन कोसय को दिजाइन करने  के बाि हम उनको दबलक ु ल फ्री ट रेदनंग िेंगे और  
साथ ही साथ दफदजकल इनफ्रास्ट र क्चर के माध्यम  से, दफदजकल क्लास रूम्स  के माध्यम  से स्टेट 
वाइज और  दिक्स्ट र क्ट् वाइज ट रेदनंग िे नी होगी, तो उन काययिालाओं  का भी हम दक्रयान्वयन  
कर ें गे। “ 
 
 (ii)     Model Fair Price Shops (FPSs) and construction  of FPSs 
under MGNREGA 
 
5.6  Ministry of Rural Development stated that as per Schedule-I of MGNREGA, the 
construction of food grain storage structures for implementing the provisions of NFSA, 
2013 is a permissible activity and accordingly States/UTs have been advised that they 
may construct Food Grain Storage Structur es under the MGNREGA, which may be 
utilized as Fair Price Shops to distribute foodgrains under NFSA, 2013. However, it 
should be ensured that construction of such buildings is done on government land 
only. All the States/UTs are also being continuously fol lowed up to implement this  
initiative. 
5.7   Under the FPS transformation initiative, this department has requested all the 
States/UTs to identify and develop 75 model FPSs in their respective States/UTs by 
utilizing the MGNREGA funds for the construction and upgradation of FPSs. 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
5.8 The indicative characteristics for developing model FPSs are shown in the 
infographic below : 
 
 
 
(iii)  MUDRA loans to FPS dealers for capital augmentation 
 
5.9 The Committee desired to be apprised about the steps taken by the government 
to provide loans at lower interest rates to FPS dealers for capital augmentation , the 
Department in a written reply, submitted as follows :-  
“MUDRA loans empower FPS dealers, aiding in capital augmentation to 
enterprise into other incom e-generating activities/services. The Department 
assists in streamlining the application process for loans, ensuring smooth 
communication between the dealers and ﬁnancial institutions through lead 
banks and State food departments. 
Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana (PMMY) is being implemented by all scheduled 
commercial banks including Regional Rural Banks. As per information received  
from Public Sector Banks (PSBs), as on 24 November, 2023, a total of 1,15,803 
loans have been extended to FPS dealers since the inception of PMMY on     
08 August, 2015.” 


23 
 
5.10 Regarding the MUDRA loan, the Representatives of the Department apprised the 
Committee at their sitting held on 05.12.2023 as under: 
“नेक्स्ट दवषय  मुद्रालोन का है। यह  िीएफएस – दिपाटयमेंट ऑफ फाइनेंदियल  सदवयसेज की तरफ  
से दिया  जा रहा  है। हमने पहले भी इस बार े  में अवगत कराया  है। हम इसको भी एक्क्ट्वली फॉलो 
कर  रहे  हैं। 24,360 मुद्रा  लोन जो सरकारी  क्षेत्र के बैंि  हैं, उनक े द्वारा एफपीएस िुकानिारों  को 
हमने दिया  है। इसक े अंतगयत अभी तक 552.82 करोड़  रुपए  का हमने इनको लोन दिया  है, 
तादक वे अपनी आदथयक समृक्ि में कोई भी अगर  कायय  करना  िाहें, तो वे कायय  कर  सकते हैं। वे 
यदि  कोई छोटा-मोटा ररटेल  दबजनेस अपने एक्िक्स्टंग इनफ्रास्ट र क्चर में बढ़ाना िाहें, तो बढ़ा 
सकते हैं।“ 
 
(iv) District-level CSC awareness workshops for FPS dealers 
 
5.11 The Committee were informed that 42,739 FPSs have been onboarded as CSCs. 
In addition, 2,33,098 FPSs have been whitelisted for onboarding.  State -wise list of 
CSC-IDs created, is placed at Annexure-II. 
During Phase -I, the CSC awareness workshop for FPSs dealers has been 
completed in 25 districts across 8 States in March -April 2023 with a total participation of 
approx. 6000 FPSs dealers. 
In Phase-II (May-July), the awareness works hops were conducted in 75 districts 
of Uttar Pradesh and 42 Aspirational Districts across Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Haryana, HP, J&K, Karnataka, Kerala, MP, Punjab, Sikkim, and Uttarakhand with a total 
participation of around 17000 FPS dealers. 
5.12   During the sitting of the Committee held on 05.12.2023, the Representatives of 
the Department informed the Committee as under: 
“एफपीएस और  सीएससी की जो सुदवधाए ं हैं, जो लास्ट बार  हमारी  ििाय हुई थी, उसक े अनुसार  
हमने एनेक्जर -1 में भी दिखाया  है दक दकस-दकस स्टेट में दकतनी सी एससी की सुदवधाए ं लोग ले 
रहे  हैं और  यदि  नही ं हैं, तो उनक े भी कारण  हैं। यह  सारा  िेटा हमने सीएससी के माध्यम  से ही 
कलेक्ट् दकया  है। इसमें हमने वाइट दलस्ट दकया  है दक हर  स्टेट में दकतनी रािन  की िुकानें हैं 
और  दकतने लोग हैं? हमने सभी से संपक य करने  की कोदिि  की है दक अगर  आप िाहें तो 
सीएससी की सुदवधा आप ले सकते हैं, दजससे आपकी इनकम आवक में वृक्ि होगी। इसमें हर  
स्टेट की अपनी-अपनी स्टेज है, दजस स्टेज पर  वहां दक्रयान्वयन  हो रहा  है। इसमें हमार े  दिपाटयमेंट 
की तरफ  से हमने हर  जगह पर  लोगों से संपक य करने  की कोदि ि की है। हमने 4,200 सैंपल 
सीएससीज़ लेकर  वहां स्टिी करने  की कोदिि  की है, दजनमें से मेजर , करीब  80 परसेंट  का 
हमार े  सवे हो गया  है। रॉ -िेटा हमें सीएससी के द्वारा दमला है। इसमें ट रेदनंग, नीि असेसमेंट, 

24 
 
क्र े दिट इनफ्रास्ट र क्चर, इनफ्रास्ट र क्चर दकतना है और  उसकी िैक्षदणक योग्यता  दकतनी है, इसक े 
अनुसार  हम लेकर  दजस-दजस जगह पर  हम सीएससी की सेवाए ं िे सकते हैं, उन जगहों पर  हम 
िेने का कायय  कर  रहे  हैं ।“ 
 
(v)      Increase sale of non-PDS commodities at FPSs 
 
5.13   As per Clause 9(9) of TPDS Control Order, 2015, State Government shall allow 
sale of commodities other than the foodgrains distributed under the TPDS at the FPS to 
improve the viability of the FPS operations.  
Additionally, States/UTs have been advised that FPS owners may be 
encouraged to sell non-PDS items through PDS outlets for en extra income. States/UTs 
may also explore the possibility for empanelment of suppliers to provide other products 
such as Khadi/Ayush products/MSME products through FPSs. A statement indicating 
essential commodities distribute by St ate Governments in addition to wheat, rice, 
coarsegrain, sugar and SKO through PDS outlets is at Annexure-III. 
5.14   On the matter of sale of non-PDS commodities at FPSs, the representatives of 
Department deposited before the Committee at their sitting he ld on 08.11.2023 as 
under :- 
“नॉन पीिीएस  कमोदिटीज़ के बार े  में एक और  बात कही गई है। हमने टीपीिीएस  क ं ट र ोल ऑियर  
में भी राज्ों  को फ्रीिम िी है। अगर  वे िाहे तो नॉनपीिीएस  कमोदिटी स्टोर  कर  सकते हैं। …….  
 आज की तारीख  में सभी राज्ों  ने उनको पूरी  छ ू ट िी है दक वे नॉनपीिीएस  कमोदिटी भी स्टोर  
कर  सकते हैं। “ 
 
 
(vi)       India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) 
 
5.15   The Committee were informed that 3164 FPSs have been enabled to provide 
banking financial services and postal services through India Post Payment Bank 
(IPPB)/DoP across Andhra Pradesh, Biha r, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Odisha, Rajasthan and Telangana. 
 
 
 

25 
 
 
(vii)        Skill training to FPS Dealers  
 
5.16     Regarding skill training to FPS Dealers, the Department informed the 
Committee that d iscussions are ongoing with M/o Skill Dev elopment and 
Entrepreneurship to provide training to FPS owners to equip them with the essential 
entrepreneurship skills required for venturing into new business avenues.  The 
discussions are at early stage. 
 
(viii)       Other Efforts 
5.17        Other efforts for transforming Fair Price Shops are shown below : 
02
03
04
01
Fair Price Shop
Common Services Centers (CSC)
MUDRA loans through the 
Department of Financial Services
Sale of non-PDS commoditiesIndia Post Payments Bank (IPPB)/
Department of Posts (DoP)
Other efforts for transforming Fair Price Shops
~43,000 FPSs enabled as CSCs
Serving as access points for the 
delivery of various B2C & G2C 
services 
24,360 MUDRA loans to FPS 
dealers amounting to Rs. 
552.82 crores.
For capital augmentation and 
business diversification. 
~3,200 FPSs enabled as Banking 
Correspondents (BCs)
To provide banking financial services 
and postal services 
TPDS Control Order 2015 
allows the sale of non-PDS 
items at FPSs
General store items like oil, pulses, 
salt, spices, etc. 
 
   
(ix) Roadmap  
5.18   The Committee desired to be apprised about the roadmap drawn if any, for 
FPS transformation, the Department in a written reply, submitted as follows:- 
“FPS Transformation is a continuous evolving process and the road map  
planned to be taken in future is as follows: 

26 
 
Identiﬁcation of need (training, credit etc.) of FPS dealers through a 
baseline survey being conducted by CSC; 
Training of FPS dealers through requisite skill trainings offered by 
Ministry of Skill  Development and Entrepreneurship (under Pradhan 
Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana) and Ministry of Rural Development (under 
Rural Development and Self  Employment Training Institute); 
Providing access to credit through existing Pradhan Mantri 
MudraYojana; 
 Effective coordination and monitoring will be done by the State/UT.” 
 

27 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
VIGILANCE  COMMITTEE S 
 
6.1   The Department in their background note submitted to the Committee about the 
constitution of Vigilance Committees (VCs) as under :- 
“In order to supervise the implementation of all the schemes under the Nat ional 
Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA), Section 29 of the Act provides for constitution 
of Vigilance Committees (VCs) by the State Government at four levels i.e. State, 
Dis trict, Block and fair price shop levels for ensuring transparency and proper 
functioning of the Targeted Public Distribution System and accountability of the 
functionaries in such system. The VCs shall be consisting of such persons, as 
may be prescribed by the State Government giving due representation to the 
local authorities, the Schedul ed Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, women and 
destitute persons or persons with disability.” 
6.2   The Department in their background note submitted to the Committee about the 
functions of Vigilance Committees (VCs) as under :-  
“The Vigilance Committees shall perform the following functions, namely: - 
(a)  regularly supervise the implementation of all schemes under this Act; 
(b)  inform the District Grievance Redressal Officer, in writing, of any violation 
of the provisions of this Act; and 
(c) inform the Dis trict Grievance Redressal Officer, in writing, of any 
malpractice or misappropriation of funds found by it.” 
6.3   In this regard, Annual Report (2022 -23) of Department has enumerated the following 
Clause of the TPDS (Control) Order, 2015 :  
I.    The TPDS (Co ntrol) Order, 2015 stipulates that the meetings of the 
Committee shall be held at least once every quarter at all levels. The date and 
periodicity of the meeting would be notified by the State Governments. 
II.   Clause 11(4) of the TPDS (C) Order, 2015 require s the State Governments to 
set up Vigilance Committees for the TPDS at the State, District, Block and fair 
price shop levels as per the provisions of the NFSA to perform functions as 
specified in the said Act.  
III.   Clause 11(5) of the TPDS (C) Order, 2015 re quires meetings of the Vigilance 
Committees shall be held at least once in every quarter at all levels and the 

28 
 
date and periodicity of the meeting shall be notified by the State Governments 
and given wide publicity.  
IV.   Clause 11(6) of the TPDS (C) Order, 2 015 requires that State Government 
shall send a report annually to the Central Government on the functioning of 
Vigilance Committees in the prescribed format.  
V.   Clause 11(7) of the TPDS (C) Order, 2015 requires that number of meetings 
held by the Vigilanc e Committees shall be displayed on the State web portal 
and the action taken on issues discussed in meetings of vigilance committees 
shall be reviewed in the next meeting. 
      
6.4    On the matter of working of Vigilance Committees, the representatives o f 
Department deposited before the Committee at their sitting held on 08.11.2023 as 
under :- 
“ये  पूरा  एफपीएस का ऑपर े िन  है। यह  भारत  सरकार  और  राज्  सरकारों  की साझेिारी  है। अगर  
राज्  सरकार  जागरुकता  के साथ काम नही ं कर े गी या  उनको भारत  सरकार  की तरफ  से मिि 
नही ं दमलेगी, तो दनदित रूप  से इसमें बाधाए ं आए ं गी। हमारा  यही  मानना है दक अगर  दवदजलेंस 
कमेदटयां  ठीक तरह  से काम कर ें , अगर  राज्  सरकार  का उनकी मॉदनटरर ं ग , सुपरदवजन , 
ऑपर े िन  के ऊपर  नज़र  रहे , तो दनदित रूप  से उनका जो काययकलाप  है, जो उनकी गदतदवदध है, 
उसमें सुधार  आएगा।“ 
6.5    On the matter of working of Vigilance Committees at FPS level, the 
representatives of Department also deposited before the Committee at their sitting 
held on 05.12.2023 as under :- 
“दवदजलेंस कमेटी सेक्शन 29 के अनुसार  िार  लेवल्स पर  होती है। यह  स्टेट लेवल, दिक्स्ट र क लेवल, 
ब्लॉक लेवल और  फ े यर  प्राइस िॉप  के लेवल पर  यानी  रािन  िुकान के लेवल पर  होती है। इसका 
मूल उद्दे श्य यह  है दक वहााँ ट र ांसपेर ें सी हो और  दजन लोगों को, जो टारगेटेि  लाभाथी हैं, उनको 
आराम  से रािन  दमले और  दजतनी उनकी एदलदजदबदलटी है, उसी िर  से उन्हें रािन  दमल जाए। 
इसमें कमेटी की रिना  राज्  सरकार  के द्वारा होती है। इसमें हम यह  सुदनदित करते  हैं दक इसमें 
अनुसूदित जादत, जनजादत, मदहलाए ं और  जो पसयन दवि दिसेदबदलटी हैं, उनको भी योग्यता  के 
अनुसार  भागीिारी  दमले। इसका मूल उद्देश्य  है दक यह  कमेटी र े गुलरली सुपरवाइज  कर  सक े दक 
यह  इम्प्लीमेंटेिन, एनएफएसए एक्ट् का दक्रयान्वयन  ठीक से हो रहा  है या  नही ं हो रहा  है। साथ ही 
साथ दिक्स्ट र क ग्रीवांस ररि र ेिल  ऑदफसर  को अगर  दकसी जगह पर  कोई भी प्रॉब्लम हो रही  होगी 
तो वे ध्यान  आक ृ ष्ट कर  सकते हैं। अगर  दकसी भी जगह पर  मालप्रैक्क्ट्स हो रही  होगी या  उदित 
िर  पर  रािन  नही ं दमल रहा  होगा या  उदित मात्रा नही ं दमल रही  होगी तो इन िीजों को भी 
दवदजलेंस कमेटी सुदनदित कर े गी।“ 
 

29 
 
6.6     Further, on the matter of awareness, the representatives of Department 
deposited before the Committee at their sitting held on 08.11.2023 as under :- 
“जो वजन दिया  जाता है, वह पााँि दकलो या  अगर  उनकी पााँि दकलो की पात्रता है तो उससे कम 
दिया  जाता है। यह  दिकायत  कई फोरम  में की जाती है। उसक े दलए जैसे अभी आपने दवदजलेंस 
कमेटी के बार े  में कहा है, एक्चुअली इसका समाधान यह  है दक लोगों में ज्ािा  जागरूकता  आए। 
जागरूकता  के दलए दवदजलेंस कमेटी और  एफसीआई की क ं सल्टेदटव कमेटीज हैं, दजसमें कई 
सिस्य  रहते  हैं। उसक े अंिर  एमपीज और  एमएलएज भी रहते  हैं। उनका यह  भी एक िादयत्व है 
दक वे एफसीआई के दवदभन्न स्टोर े ज प्वाइंट्स और  फ े यर  प्राइस िॉप  के स्टोर े ज प्वाइंट्स पर  जा 
कर  िेख सकते हैं।“ 
 

30 
 
CHAPTER VII 
 
CHALLENGE S AND INITIATIVES  
 
7.1  The Committee asked the Department to share various challenges being faced 
by the Department/State Government for FPS transformation and initiatives taken by 
the Department to strengthen the viability and profitability of FPSs. In response, the 
Department, in their written relies submitted to the Committee as follows : 
“In order to augment the viability of FPSs, DFPD has collaborated with CSC e 
Governance Services India Lt d for delivery of citizen -centric services at FPSs, 
tie-up with India Post Payments Banks for enabling FPS dealers to work as 
Business Correspondents for providing banking and financial services, sale of 
non-PDS commodities at the FPSs, credit linkages to dealers for business 
expansion, among others to provide additional business avenues to FPS 
dealers.  
Network connectivity in remote parts of the country is one of the major 
challenges being faced in the transformation of FPSs. In addition to this, FPS 
dealers face various challenges which are critical to the success of 
aforementioned activities such as lack of entrepreneur skills, digital and 
financial literacy, among others. To address the skill development challenges, 
this Department is exploring possibil ities for conducting capacity building 
programs or short term skill development courses through Ministry of Rural 
Development (MoRD) and the Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) that boost the confidence of FPS owners and equip 
them with  essential entrepreneurship skills required for venturing into new 
business avenues.” 
7.2   The Department, in their written relies submitted to the Committee as follows : 
“Further, with respect to challenges such as fake/ineligible ration cards, it is 
stated that as per the Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) Control 
Order, 2015, the review of ration cards/beneﬁciaries list, identiﬁcation of 
ineligible/duplicate ration cards and inclusion of genuine eligible 
beneﬁciaries/households   is   the   resp onsibility   of   the   concerned   
State/UT Government.  However,  under  instructions  from  this  Department,  
States/UTs continuously review the `beneﬁciaries list and issue new ration 
cards to the eligible households/beneﬁciaries in place of duplicate  / cancelled 
beneﬁciaries/ ration cards under the prescribed ceiling limit of the National 
Food Security Act (NFSA), to achieve the rightful targeting of subsidised food 
grains.”  

31 
 
Part-II 
Observations/Recommendations 
 
1. The Committee note that Department  of Food and Public Distribution 
implemented Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS), which was 
aimed at the ensuring food security of the people, especially the poor and 
vulnerable sections of the society i.e. Antyodaya families and Below 
Poverty Line families. Thereafter, End -To- End Computerization of TPDS 
operations scheme was also implemented to bring more transparency in 
the entire PDS operations and address issues related to leakages and 
diversion of foodgrains, inclusion and exclusion errors in i dentiﬁcation of 
beneﬁciaries under TPDS, etc. The Committee further note that the 
Department  is implementing   the  Scheme in association  with  all  
States/UTs  on  cost  sharing basis. The Committee note with satisfaction 
that  the key activities of the scheme and its expected outcome  like 
Digitization of ration cards  for beneﬁciary database for correct 
identiﬁcation, online allocation of foodgrains towards system generated 
allocation to bring transparency in allocation of foodgrains , up to the Fair 
Price Shops level, computerisation of Supply Chain Management for 
ensuring timely availability of foodgrains at all FPSs for delivery to the 
targeted beneﬁciaries  have been a great success so far. Further, they also 
acknowledge the efforts of the Department in checking leakage/diversion 
of foodgrains , Online Redressal of g rievances, Toll Free Helplines and  
creation  of Transparency Portals to introduce transparency and public 
accountability in the implementation of TPDS. The Committee appreciate 
the various ste ps taken by the Government/State Government s for 
implementation of Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) for 
ensuring food security to the people, especially the poor and vulnerable 
sections of the society i.e.  Antyodaya families and Below Poverty Li ne 
families. The Committee hope that the Department will continue their 
efforts in this direction for reaping expected results.  

32 
 
2. The Committee note that under the Targeted Public Distribution 
System (TPDS) reforms, the Department has implemented the One  Nation 
One Ration Card (ONORC) plan aimed at the nation -wide portability of 
ration cards and beneﬁciaries covered under the National Food Security 
Act (NFSA) , 2013 .  The Committee also note that since inception of 
ONORC plan in August 2019  till 08 th December, 2023, more  than 125 Crore 
portability transactions have been recorded  under  the ONORC plan in the 
country, which include both inter -State and intra -State transactions 
delivering both regular NFSA and PMGKAY foodgrains to the beneficiaries 
with flexibility. The Committee observe that during the same period 
States/UTs have   delivered   more than 241 LMT foodgrains to NFSA 
beneﬁciaries. While appreciating the efforts of the Department w.r.t. 
ONORC plan, t he Committee recommend the Department to address the  
challenges such as fake/ineligible ration cards  and  coordinate with 
State/UTs for ensuring continuo us review of beneﬁciaries’ list and 
facilitate them to issue new ration cards to the eligible 
households/beneﬁciaries under the prescribed ceiling limit of the National 
Food Security  Act (NFSA) , 2013 , to achieve the rightful targeting of 
subsidised food grains.  
3. The Committee note that as per Section 2(4) of National Food Security Act, 
2013, Fair Price Shop means a shop which has been  licensed to distribute 
essential commodities by an order issued under section 3 of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955, t o the ration card holders under the Targeted Public 
Distribution System. State & UT Governments are responsible for licensing, 
regulation, monitoring, and operation of FPSs. Preference is accorded to public 
institutions such as panchayats, SHG, cooperative  societies and management of 
FPS by women or their collectives. The Committee further note that Public 
Distribution System (PDS) is an important part of the Government’s policy for 
ensuring food security of over 81 Crore beneﬁciaries (persons) covered thro ugh 
over 23 Crore ration cards in the country issued under the National Food Security 
Act, 2013 (NFSA) for distributing/delivering about 43 LMT of highly subsidised 
foodgrains, like Rice, Wheat and Coarse -grains through a network of about 5.4 

33 
 
Lakh Fair Pri ce Shops (FPSs) spread across all States/UTs. The PDS is operated 
under joint responsibilities of the Central and State/UT Governments,    wherein    
this Department, through Food Corporation of India (FCI), has assumed the 
responsibility for procurement, storage,   transportation   and   bulk   allocation   
of   foodgrains   to   States/UTs. Whereas, the responsibility of identiﬁcation of 
eligible households/beneﬁciaries,  issuance  of  Ration  Cards,  Aadhaar  seeding,  
FPS- wise allocation and distributi on of foodgrains, authentication of 
beneﬁciaries, licensing and monitoring of FPSs, maintenance of all 
databases/records, etc. rest with the respective State/UT Government. The 
Committee note with satisfaction that the Department has been running the 
herculean task of providing subsidized food grains to the eligible beneficiaries 
through the effective mechanism of PDS which involves a larger network of FPSs. 
They understand that this requires great coordination among the State/UT 
Governments and hope that t he Department will continue their earnest efforts for 
efficient functioning of the PDS and FPS and apprise the Committee accordingly. 
4.  The Committee note that u nder PDS reforms, the Department, in 
collaboration with all States/UTs has implemented a sche me on ‘End -to-End 
Computerization of TPDS Operations’.  Under  this  scheme,  ration  
cards/beneﬁciaries  database  have been  completely  digitized  in  all  States/UTs,  
transparency  portal  and  online grievance redressal facility/Toll -free number 
have been implemented in all States/UTs, online allocation has been implemented 
in all States/UTs (except UTs of Chandigarh and Puducherry, which have adopted 
DBT Cash Transfer scheme ) and supply chain has been computerized in              
31 States/UTs. Furth er, the Automation of Fair Price Shops (FPS) is also being 
done in all States/UTs by installing electronic Point of Sale (ePoS) devices at the 
FPSs for the distribution of foodgrains in a transparent manner ( electronically) 
and for unique identiﬁcation of genuine beneﬁciaries through biometric/Aadhaar 
authentication on the ePoS device . The Committee appreciate PDS reforms 
carried out by the Department  in collaboration with all States/UTs by 
implementing a scheme on ‘End -to-End Computerization of TPDS Operations’.  
The Committee specifically desire that the Department should ensure that  all 

34 
 
ePoS are connected with weighing machines and synchronized so that the 
beneficiaries could get the exact quantity of ration. 
5. The Commi ttee note that FPS Transformation is a continuous evolving 
process and the road map  planned to be taken in future by the Department 
include (i) Identiﬁcation of need (training, credit etc.) of FPS dealers through a 
baseline survey being conducted by CSC; (ii) Training of FPS dealers through 
requisite skill trainings offered by Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (under Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana) and Ministry of 
Rural Development (under Rural Development and Self  Employment Training 
Institute); (iii) Providing access to credit through existing Pradhan Mantri Mudra 
Yojana; and (iv) Effective coordination and monitoring will be done by the 
State/UT. W hile appreciating the road map planned to be taken in future to 
improve the profitability of Fair Price Shops (FPSs) to ensure their long -term 
viability and sustainability, the Committee recommend that the Department 
should also involve State/UT Governments, Self Help Groups and Ration Dealer 
Associations for its better understanding and outcome which will eventually 
strengthen the viability and profitability of FPSs. 
6. The Committee note with satisfaction that under the FPS transformation 
initiative, this department has requested all the States/UTs to identify and 
develop 75 model FPSs in their respective States/UTs by utilizing the MGNREGA 
funds for the construction and upgradation of FPSs. The Committee also note 
that as pe r information received from Public Sector Banks (PSBs), as on           
24 November, 2023, a total of 1,15,803 loans have been extended to FPS dealers 
since the inception of PMMY on 08 August, 2015. The Committee observe that In 
regard to District-level CSC awareness workshops for FPS dealers, 42,739 FPSs 
have been onboarded as CSCs. In addition, 2,33,098 FPSs have been whitelisted 
for onboarding.  The Committee also observe that States/UTs have been advised 
that FPS owners may be encouraged to sell non -PDS items through PDS outlets 
for en extra income. States/UTs may also explore the possibility for 
empanelment of suppliers to provide other products such as Khadi/Ayush 
products/MSME products through FPSs. Further, 3164 FPSs have been enabled 
to provide bank ing financial services and postal services through India Post 

35 
 
Payment Bank (IPPB)/DoP across Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan and Telangana. While applauding  the 
aforementioned efforts made by Department, the C ommittee desire that  a 
monitoring cell at the highest level be formed to track the progress of model FPS 
in all the states so that their earnest efforts may culminate into the desired 
results. The Committee may also be apprised about the progress made in t his 
direction.  
7. The Committee note that in order to supervise the implementation of all 
the schemes under the National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA), Section 29 of 
the Act provides for constitution of Vigilance Committees (VCs) by the State 
Government at four levels i.e. State, District, Block and fair price shop levels for 
ensuring transparency and proper functioning of the Targeted Public 
Distribution System and accountability of the functionaries in such system.  The 
Committee further note that the f unctions of the Vigilance Committees are         
(a) regularly supervise the implementation of all schemes under the Act;           
(b) inform the District Grievance Redressal Officer, in writing, of any violation of 
the provisions of the Act; and (c) inform the District Grievance Redressal Officer, 
in writing, of any malpractice or misappropriation of funds found by it.  The 
Committee observe that main objective of the Vigilance Committee is that there 
should be transparency and accountability and the peop le who are the targeted 
beneficiaries should get ration comfortably and at the same rate as per their 
eligibility. The Committee believe that without the dedicated efforts of the 
Department and State /UT Governments, transparency, accountability of the 
functionaries and proper functioning of the Targeted Public Distribution System   
is not possible.  The Committee , therefore, suggest suitable steps be taken by 
Department in coordination with the State/UT Governments for improvement of 
working of Vigilance Com mittees in order to ensure transparency and 
accountability. 
8. The Committee note that the Department of Food & Public Distribution 
(DFPD) has strived to improve the profitability of Fair Price Shops (FPSs) to 
ensure their long -term viability and sustainab ility, offering a wide range of 
citizen-centric services and an enhanced beneficiary experience. The Committee 

36 
 
further note that for strengthen the viability and profitability of FPSs, the 
department has implemented various initiatives for FPS transformati on and 
regularly seeks updates on FPS transformation activities from the States/Union 
Territories for review and monitoring. The Committee observe that DFPD has 
signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with CSC e -Governance 
Services India Ltd for the del ivery of CSC services in consultation with the 
respective State/UT. The Committee further note  that DFPD has collaborated 
with other ministries/departments, such as India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) and 
the Department of Financial Services, to enable FPS dea lers to provide 
additional services. While appreciating the progressive steps taken by the 
Department to improve the profitability of Fair Price Shops (FPSs) to ensure 
their long -term viability and sustainability, the Committee desire that the 
Department s hould continue their efforts with other ministries/department s for 
strengthening the viability and profitability of FPSs  and also explore more 
options and if need be guidance/ involvement of people’s representatives may 
also be considered. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 New Delhi;                                  LOCKET CHATTERJEE,  
06  February, 2024                                    Chairperson, 
17 Magha,1945 (Saka)                                                            Standing Committee on  
      Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 

37 
 
 
Annexure I 
 
Coverage of beneficiaries under the National Food Security Act, 2013 
Sl.  
No.
    
States/ UTs  
Impl. 
Mont
h 
Percenta
ge 
Coverage 
Accept
ed No. 
of 
person
s under 
NFSA 
(in lakh) 
Ceilin
g of 
AAY 
HH 
(in 
lakh) 
Present coverage (In lakh) – As on 
20.11.2023 
Rur
al 
Urba
n  
AAY Priorit
y  Total 
perso
ns 
 % of 
accept
ed 
person
s  
No. of 
familie
s 
No. of 
perso
n 
No. of 
perso
ns 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Dec-
15 
60.9
6 
41.1
4 268.23 9.09 9.08 23.52 244.70 268.22 100.00
% 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Apr-
16 
66.3
1 
51.5
5 8.71 0.38 0.38 1.50 6.90 8.40 96.48% 
3 Assam Dec-
15 
84.1
7 
60.3
5 251.90 7.04 6.92 28.08 223.08 251.17 99.71% 
4 Bihar Mar-
14 
85.1
2 
74.5
3 871.16 25.01 25.01 125.0
5 746.11 871.16 100.00
% 
5 Chhattisgar
h 
Jan-
14 
84.2
5 
59.9
8 200.77 7.19 7.19 20.42 180.35 200.77 100.00
% 
6 Delhi Oct-
13 
37.6
9 
43.5
9 72.78 1.57 0.69 2.78 70.00 72.78 100.00
% 
7 Goa Dec-
15 
42.2
4 
33.0
2 5.32 0.18 0.12 0.46 4.86 5.32 100.00
% 
8 Gujarat Apr-
16 
74.6
4 
48.2
5 382.84 8.13 7.73 35.53 316.07 351.60 91.84% 
9 Haryana Sep-
13 
54.6
1 
41.0
5 126.49 3.03 2.68 11.35 115.14 126.49 100.00
% 
10 Himachal 
Pradesh  
Oct-
13 
56.2
3 
30.9
9 36.82 1.97 1.82 7.67 20.98 28.64 77.80% 
11 Jharkhand Oct-
15 
86.4
8 
60.2
0 264.25 9.18 8.94 34.76 229.43 264.19 99.98% 
12 Karnataka  Jan-
14 
76.0
4 
49.3
6 401.93 12.00 10.97 43.91 358.02 401.93 100.00
% 
13 Kerala Nov-
16 
52.6
3 
39.5
0 154.80 5.96 5.96 25.59 129.21 154.80 100.00
% 

38 
 
14 Madhya 
Pradesh 
Mar-
14 
80.1
0 
62.6
1 546.42 15.82 14.63 54.93 479.86 534.79 97.87% 
15 Maharashtr
a 
Feb-
14 
76.3
2 
45.3
4 700.17 25.05 25.05 108.0
1 592.16 700.17 100.00
% 
16 Manipur Apr-
16 
88.5
6 
85.7
5 25.06 0.64 0.64 1.82 18.26 20.08 80.14% 
17 Meghalaya Feb-
16 
77.7
9 
50.8
7 21.46 0.70 0.70 2.91 18.54 21.46 100.00
% 
18 Mizoram Mar-
16 
81.8
8 
48.6
0 7.06 0.26 0.26 0.64 6.19 6.83 96.71% 
19 Nagaland Jul-
16 
79.8
3 
61.9
8 14.79 0.48 0.48 2.11 11.94 14.05 94.98% 
20 Odisha Nov-
15 
82.1
7 
55.7
7 326.21 12.65 12.53 37.81 287.22 325.03 99.64% 
21 Punjab Dec-
13 
54.7
9 
44.8
3 141.51 1.79 1.79 7.71 133.80 141.51 100.00
% 
22 Rajasthan Oct-
13 
69.0
9 
53.0
0 446.62 9.32 6.29 22.29 417.72 440.01 98.52% 
23 Sikkim Jan-
16 
75.7
4 
40.3
6 4.06 0.17 0.17 0.57 3.24 3.81 93.91% 
24 Tamil Nadu Nov-
16 
62.5
5 
37.7
9 364.70 18.65 18.64 65.78 298.34 364.12 99.84% 
25 Telangana  Oct-
15 
60.9
6 
41.1
4 191.70 6.49 5.67 15.29 176.33 191.62 99.96% 
26 Tripura Sep-
15 
74.7
5 
49.5
4 25.02 1.13 1.09 4.62 19.81 24.43 97.65% 
27 Uttar 
Pradesh 
Jan-
16 
79.5
6 
64.4
3 1520.61 40.95 40.89 132.9
2 
1370.8
5 
1503.7
7 98.89% 
28 Uttarakhan
d 
Oct-
15 
65.2
6 
52.0
5 61.94 1.91 1.84 7.92 54.02 61.94 100.00
% 
29 West 
Bengal 
Jun-
15 
74.4
7 
47.5
5 601.84 19.86 16.42 54.99 546.85 601.84 100.00
% 
30 A&N Mar-
16 
24.9
4 1.70 0.63 0.11 0.04 0.14 0.46 0.61 96.61% 
31 DNH&DD Nov-
15 
69.9
3 
54.1
7 3.56 0.08 0.05 0.24 2.45 2.69 75.60% 
32 Lakshadwe
ep 
Aug-
15 
35.3
0 
33.5
6 0.22 0.01 0.01 0.04 0.18 0.22 99.06% 
33 Chandigarh 
(DBT) 
Feb-
14 
38.5
4 
47.2
6 4.96 0.09 0.00 0.01 2.98 2.99 60.28% 
34 Puducherry Sep- 59.6 46.9 6.34 0.32 0.25 0.82 5.52 6.34 99.99% 

39 
 
(DBT) 15 8 4 
35 J&K Feb-
16 
63.9
3 
46.9
3 72.69 2.76 2.33 10.61 61.80 72.41 99.61% 
36 Ladakh Feb-
16 
55.6
5 
41.6
2 1.44 0.06 0.06 0.29 1.15 1.44 99.99% 
Total 75.0
0 
50.0
0 8135.01 250.0
0 237.30 893.0
9 
7154.5
5 
8047.6
4 98.93% 
 
 

40 
 
Annexure II 
State-wise list of CSC-IDs created 
State / UT CSC IDs Created 
  
Uttarakhand 4,063 
Gujarat 6,365 
Telangana 21 
Himachal Pradesh 1,308 
Madhya Pradesh 1,356 
Jharkhand 6,671 
Mizoram 0 
Rajasthan 4,596 
Meghalaya 576 
Maharashtra 6,667 
Delhi 1 
Tamil Nadu 1,553 
Haryana 634 
Uttar Pradesh 3,704 
West Bengal 0 
Puducherry 0 
Jammu and Kashmir 2,470 
Tripura 51 
Kerala 117 
Assam 26 
Bihar 1 
Punjab 47 
Sikkim 353 
Lakshadweep 0 
Arunachal Pradesh 84 
Karnataka 1,032 
Dadra And Nagar Haveli 0 
Daman and Diu 0 
Andhra Pradesh 1 
Chhattisgarh 0 
Chandigarh 0 
Manipur 0 
Nagaland 0 
Odisha 977 
Goa 65 
Total 42,739 

41 
 
Annexure III 
 
Statement indicating Essential commodities distributed by State Governments in addition to 
wheat, rice, coarse-grain, sugar and SKO through PDS outlets. 
राज्य सरकार ों द्वारा सार्वजनिक नर्तरण प्रणाली के  निक्री क े न्द् ों  के  माध्यम से  गेहों, चार्ल, म टा अिाज, चीिी 
तथा सुपररयर  क े र सीि  ऑयल के  अनतररक्‍त नर्तररत आर्श्‍यक  र्स्तुओों क  दर्ाविे र्ाला नर्र्रण  
 
     (Compilation of information received from States/UTs by 30.06.2023)  
                            (नदिाोंक 30.06.2023 तक  राज्य/सोंघ राज्य क्षेत्र से  प्राप्त सूचिा  का  ससससस )  
S. 
No 
क्र. 
सों 
 
State/UT 
राज्य /सोंघ 
राज्य क्षेत्र  
Essential 
Commodity 
(other than 
wheat, rice, 
coarse-grain, 
sugar and 
SKO) आर्श्‍यक  
र्स्‍तुए ों (गेहों, 
चार्ल, म टा 
अिाज, चीिी तथा 
सुनपररयर  
क े र सीि  ऑयल 
के  अनतररक्‍त) 
Qty. allotted 
per family 
per month 
प्रति पररर्ार 
प्रनत माह 
आिोंनटत मात्रा 
Issue price per 
kg./ltrs प्रनत 
नकल ग्राम/लीटर  
निगवम मूल्य  
Scheme 
operational 
since से  जारी  
य जिा 
Date of 
Reporting 
by the 
State/UT  
राज्य /सोंघ 
राज्य क्षेत्र 
द्वारा सूनचत  
करिे  की    
नतनथ 
             
1 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
आंध्र प्रद े श 
Red Gram Dal 1 kg.  Rs. 67/- per kg  2015 02 .05.2023 
Double Fortified 
Salt 
1 kg. Rs. 12/- per kg February, 
2017 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
 
Nil Nil Nil Nil 24.05.2023 
3 Bihar Nil Nil Nil Nil 26.05.2023 
4 Chhattisg
arh  
छत्तीसगढ़ 
Refined Iodized  
Salt 
2 Kg in  
scheduled 
areas & 1 kg  
non-
scheduled 
area per 
ration card 
Free of cost  2004 09.05.2023 

42 
 
(AAY and 
PHH card) 
Gud (Jaggery) 2kg per ration 
card (AAY, 
PHH, 
Nihshakt and 
Nirashrit card) 
in Baster 
Division 
Rs. 17/- 2020 
  Whole Gram 2 kg in per 
ration card 
(AAY and 
PHH card) 
Scheduled 
Block and 
MADA Region 
Rs. 05/- 2013  
5 Delhi NIL NIL NIL NIL 06.07.2023 
6 Goa NIL NIL NIL  NIL  09.05.2023 
7 Gujarat 
गुजरात  
Refined Iodized 
Salt 
 
1kg upto 6 
member per 
card 
2kg above 6 
member per 
card 
(BPL/AAY 
ration card)  
Rs. 1/- per kg 2009 24.07.2020 
Refined Cotton 
seed Oil 
1 ltr. per 
card(in 
August, 20 & 
November, 
20) BPL/AAY 
ration Card 
Rs. 50/- ltrs. (As 
decide by State 
Govt.)  
1980-81 
8 Himachal 
Pradesh 
हिमाचल 
प्रद े श 
1.Urd Sabut 
2.Mong Sabut 
3.Malka 
4.Dal Chana 
1 kg 1. Rs.40-75/-per kg 1.4.2007 24.07.2020 
1 kg 2. Rs.55/- per kg  1.4.2007 
1 kg 3. Rs.75/- per kg  1.4.2007 
1 kg 4. Rs.40-50/- per 
kg 
1.4.2007 

43 
 
Edible oil (Any 
one out of 
Refined Oil or 
Mustard Oil)  
1 ltr. upto 2 
family 
members &  
2 ltr. more 
than 2 family 
members 
 
Rs. 88/- per 
ltr.(Mustard Oil) 
1.4.2007 
Iodised Salt 1kg per ration 
card 
Rs. 4 per kg/ per 
ration card 
1.4.2007 
9 Mizoram Nil Nil Nil Nil 01.06.2023 
10 Odisha  Nil Nil Nil Nil 17.05.2023 
11 Punjab Pulses Urad dal 
under PMGKAY 
1 Kg - 2020 08.07.2020 
Atta under Atam 
Nirbhar Bharat 
(ANB) 
5 Kg per 
Member 
- 2020 
Chana Whole 
under ANB 
 1/2 kg per 
member  
-   2020 
12 Tamil 
Nadu 
तहमलनाड ु    
Tur Dal 1kg per card Rs. 30/- 14.04.2007 07.11.2022 
Palmolein Oil 1ltr. per card Rs.25/- per ltr.  14.04.2007  
13 Telangana  Nil Nil Nil Nil 27.04.2023 
14 Tripura 
हिपुरा 
Masoor Dal 1kg/family per 
month to all 
Ration Card 
Holders. 
For NFSA-Rs. 
59.00/Kg & For 
Non-NFSA-Rs. 
84.00/Kg 
January, 2019 26.04.2023 
       
 
 

44 
 
Sugar  1kg/family per 
month to all 
Ration Card 
Holders. 
Rs. 23.00/kg April, 2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Salt RC having (1 
to 2 
Members)- 1 
kg/RC 
RC having (3 
to 5 
Members)- 2 
kg/RC 
RC having (6 
or above  
Members)- 
3kg/RC 
Rs. 7.00/Kg 1970 
Tea 100 gm 
consumer 
pack, As per 
requirement 
by 
Beneficiaries 
Rs.20.00/Packet September, 
2019 
  Soya Chunk  100 gm 
consumer 
pack, As per 
requirement 
by 
Beneficiaries 
Rs.16.00/Packet December, 
2022 

45 
 
  Non PDS 
product like 
FMCG 
products, SHG 
Products & 
Van-dhan 
Products 
As per 
requirement 
by 
Beneficiaries 
As open market 
price  
January, 2022  
 
 
 
 
 
09.04.2021 
 
 
 
31.05.2023  
15 Uttarakhand 
उत्तराखोंड 
 
DAL (Masoor &  
Urad Dal) 
2 Kg. per card 
 per month 
 Masoor dal 
 @Rs. 62.00/Kg 
 Urad Dals  
            @Rs. 
71.00/Kg 
12.09.2019 09.04.2021 
16 Jharkhand   Free Flow 
Iodized 
 Salt 
1Kg/family  Rs. 01.00   Since 2004-
05 
31.05.2023 
Note: 25 State/UT Governments namely, Assam, Gujarat, Ha ryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland,  Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim,  
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh,  Uttarrakhand A&N Island, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu, 
Lakshadweep, Puducherry and Ladakh have reported that they are not distributing essential commodities in addition 
to wheat, rice, coarse-grain, sugar and SKO through PDS outlets.  
 
 

46 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023 -2024) HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, 8TH NOVEMBER, 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Smt. Locket Chatterjee - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Khagen Murmu 
3. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
4. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
5. Dr. Amar Singh 
6. Smt. Kavita Singh 
7. Shri Vaithilingam Ve. 
 
Rajya Sabha 
8. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
9. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
10. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai             - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan    - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dong Lianthang Tonsing            - Deputy Secretary 
 

47 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to have briefing by the representatives of the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution on the subject ‘Transforming Fair Price Shops’.  
(The witnesses were called in) 
3. The Chairperson, then welcomed the representatives of the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution to the sitting and invited their attention to Dire ction 55 (1) of the 
‘Directions by the Speaker’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings.   
4. The Chairperson in the welcome remarks requested the witnesses to apprise the 
Committee about initiatives taken by the Department to strengthen the viability  and 
profitability of Fair Price Shops, transformation by providing additional business 
avenues to FPS dealers and provision of value -added services at FPS, Collaboration 
with other Ministries/Departments for transforming Fair Price Shops, current status o f 
Model Fair Price Shops, steps taken by DFPD for implementation of additional services 
at the FPS such as  Common Service Centre (CSC) services, banking services through 
tie-up with banks/corporate BCs, sale of other commodities/general store items, detai ls 
of roadmap drawn for FPS transformation, current status of Model Fair Price Shops, 
Sl 
No. 
Name Designation 
1. Shri Sanjeev Chopra Secretary (Food &PD) 
2. Shri Shantmanu AS&FA 
3. 
Ms. Richa Sharma AS (Policy & FCI) 
4. 
Shri Suneel Sachdeva Director (NFSA) 

48 
 
constrains/challenges faced the Department and steps taken by the Department to 
address those challenges etc. 
5. The representatives of the Department of Food and Public Distribution made a 
power point presentation before the Committee on the various aspects of the subject 
‘Transforming Fair Price Shops’ such as progress of Fair Price Shop Automation, 
overview of Fair Price Shops, Improvement in Infrastructure of FPSs, Key  benefits 
realized from FPS automation, Construction of model FPSs through MGNREGA etc. 
6. The Committee then sought certain clarifications on the issues related to the 
subject such as steps taken/being taken by Government to improve the viability of 
FPSs, various constraints/challenges being faced by the Department/State Government 
for FPS transformation, details of roadmap drawn for FPS transformation, current status 
of Model Fair Price Shops, Steps taken by the Government to increase sale of non-PDS 
commodities at FPSs etc. The representatives of the Department replied to various 
queries raised/clarifications sought by the Members on the subject.  The Committee 
directed the Department to furnish the written replies to those queries/clarifications 
which could not be clarified/replied to.  
7. The Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution for appearing before the Committee and furnishing valuable 
information on the subject. 
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
8. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx. 
 A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
************* 
___________________________________________________________ 
  
xxxx Matter does not relate to the Report. 

49 
 
APPENDIX II 
MINUTES OF THE FOU RTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023 -2024) HELD ON 
TUESDAY, 5TH DECEMBER, 2023 
  The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. 4,  
Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
 Smt. Locket Chatterjee - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
11. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
12. Ms. Debasree Chaudhuri 
13. Shri Rajendra D. Gavit 
14. Shri Khagen Murmu 
15. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
16. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
17. Dr. Amar Singh 
18. Smt. Himadri Singh 
19. Smt. Kavita Singh 
20. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
Rajya Sabha 
21. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
22. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
23. Shri Baburam Nishad 
24. Shri Rajmani Patel 
25. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
 
SECRETARIAT 
5. Dr. Ram Raj Rai             - Joint Secretary 
6. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 
7. Dr. Mohit Rajan    - Deputy Secretary 
8. Shri Dong Lianthang Tonsing            - Deputy Secretary 

50 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution in connection with examination of the subject  
‘Transforming Fair Price Shops’. 
(The witnesses were called in) 
3. The Chairperson, then welcomed the representatives of the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution to the sitting and invited their attention to Direction 55 (1) of the 
‘Directions by the Speaker’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings.   
4. The Chairperson in the welcome remarks requested the witnesses to apprise the 
Committee about initiatives taken by the Department to strengthen the viability and 
profitability of Fair Price Shop s by providing additional business avenues to FPS 
dealers, collaboration with other Ministries/Departments to enable FPS dealers to 
provide additional services, various challenges faced the Department in the way of 
modernization of TPDS operations like inc lusion & exclusion errors, leakage & 
diversion, fake/ineligible ration cards etc. and steps taken by the Department to address 
those challenges etc. 
5. The representatives of the Department of Food and Public Distribution made a 
power point presentation be fore the Committee on the various aspects of the subject 
Sl 
No. 
Name Designation 
1. Shri Sanjeev Chopra Secretary (Food &PD) 
2. Shri Shantmanu AS&FA 
3. 
Shri Ravi Shanakar Director (PD) 
4. 
Shri Suneel Sachdeva Director (NFSA) 

51 
 
‘Transforming Fair Price Shops’ such as progress of Fair Price Shop Automation, 
overview of Fair Price Shops, Key benefits realized from FPS automation,  Update on 
Initiative to provide skill training  to FPS Dealers, Enabling FPS with CSC Services in 
States/UTs, Working & Functions of Vigilance Committee. 
6. The Committee then sought certain clarifications on the issues related to the 
subject such as Steps taken by the government to increase sale of no n-PDS 
commodities at FPSs, steps taken by the government to provi de loans at lower interest 
rates to FPS dealers for capital augmentation, coordination mechanism between the 
Central Government and State Governments for time -bound implementation of 
transformation process, current status of Model Fair Price Shops (FPS) an d 
construction of FPSs under MGNREGA  etc. The representatives of the Department 
replied to various queries raised/clarifications sought by the Members on the subject.  
The Committee directed the Department to furnish the written replies to those 
queries/clarifications which could not be clarified/replied to.  
7. The Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution for appearing before the Committee and furnishing valuable 
information on the subject. 
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
 A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
************* 

52 
 
APPENDIX III 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023 -24) HELD ON 
TUESDAY, 6TH FEBRUARY, 2024 
The Committee sat from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, Room 
No. 140, Third Floor, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Smt. Locket Chatterjee  -    Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed 
4. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
5.  Shri Khagen Murmu 
6. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
7. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
8. Dr. Amar Singh 
9.  Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
 
Rajya Sabha 
10.  Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
11.  Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
12.  Dr. Fauzia Khan 
13.  Shri Baburam Nishad 
14.  Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                          - Deputy Secretary 

53 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Mem bers to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft Reports: 
(i) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx; 
(ii)         Draft Report on the subject, ‘Transforming Fair Price Shops’ pertaining to 
the Department of Food and Public Distribution. 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the Draft Reports. 
4. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted both the Draft Reports without 
any amendments/modifications.  
5.  The Committee then authorized Hon’ble Chairperson t o finalize the report and 
present/lay the same in both Houses of Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
___________________________________________________________ 
  
xxxx Matter does not relate to the Report. 
 