 
 
            STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, 
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024-2025) 
 
 
     
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the Observations/ Recommendations contained 
in the Fifth Report of the Committee ( Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants 
(2024-2025) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs)} 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
            July 2025/ Sravana 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
9 


 
 
  
NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024-2025) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the Observations/ Recommendations contained 
in the Fifth Report of the Committee ( Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the De mands for Grants 
(2024-2025) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs)} 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.07.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29.07.2025 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
             July 2025/ Sravana 1947 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Composition of the Committee 
 
(ii) 
Introduction 
 
(iii) 
Chapter I Report 
 
1 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by Government 
 
9 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government replies 
 
21 
Chapter IV Observation/Recommendation which have not been 
accepted by Government 
 
22 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of Government are still awaited 
 
23 
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Committee 
(2024-25) held on 17 July, 2025 
 
24 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Fifth 
Report of the Standing Committee  on Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution ( Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) 
 
26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (2024-25) 
 
                   Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi   -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Anto Antony 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Jaswantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor 
5. Smt. Malvika Devi 
6. Shri Manish Jaiswal 
7. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa# 
8. Shri Manoj Kumar 
9. Shri Sunil Kumar 
10. Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah 
11. Shri Ajendra Singh Lodhi 
12. Shri Neeraj Maurya 
13. Shri Bastipati Nagaraju 
14. Shri Haribhai Patel 
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
16. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu 
17. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh 
18. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh 
19. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane 
20. Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
21. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
24. Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
25. Shri Baburam Nishad 
26. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah* 
29. Vacant 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi       -           Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   -  Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan             - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Abdul Khan  - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 26.09.2024 vide Bulletin Part II, Para No. 838 dated 26.09.2024.  
* Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah, MP, RS nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.01.2025 Vide Bulletin Part -II, Para No.1655 dated 
27.01.2025.  
# Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa, MP, LS nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 29.1.2025 Vide Bulletin Part -II, Para No.1710 dated 
30.1.2025 vice Shri Saumitra Khan, MP, LS.  
 
(ii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs , Food and Public 
Distribution (2024-2025) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on 
their behalf, pre sent this Ninth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee ( Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants (2024 -2025) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
2.   The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.12.2024. 
The Government has furnished its replies indicating Action Taken on the recommendations 
contained in the Report on 16.05.2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
17.07.2025.  The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix -I to 
the Report. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                    Kanimozhi Karunanidhi, 
27 July, 2025                               Chairperson, 
05 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)                                                  Standing Committee on  
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
        
REPORT 
CHAPTER - I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee (2024-
2025), (18 th Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants 2024 -25 of Department of Consumer 
Affairs. 
1.2 The Fifth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 
16.12.2024.   It contained 12 Observations/ Recommendations.  
1.3 Action taken replies in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received and categorized as follows:- 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Recommendation Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 & 12 
Total: 12 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies: 
   Recommendation No.: Nil          Total: 0 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies   of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Recommendation No.: Nil          Total: 0 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
  Recommendation No.: Nil 
                                                                                                                                 Total: 0 
  Chapter-V 
 

2 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the implementation 
of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government.  The Committee 
desire that final action taken notes  to the Observations/ Recommendations contained 
in Chapter I of this Report should be furnished to them not later than three mo nths of 
the presentation of this Report.    
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action -taken by the Government on some of their 
Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No.2.21) 
 
A.  Allocation under Central Sector Schemes 
1.6 The Committee in their original report observed/ recommended as follows:-  
“The Committee note that during 2022 -23 the allocation under Central Sector 
Schemes was dropped from ₹1599 crore at BE to ₹98.34 crore at RE stage.   Further 
for the year 2023 -24, AE remained at ₹148.39 crore and RE at ₹182.61 crore, i.e., 
only 81.26% of RE was utilized during 2023 -24.   The Committee find that one of the 
key factors attributed for underutilization of budget is the dependency on various 
agencies li ke the National Physical Laboratory, Fluid Control Research Institute, 
ISRO, C-DAC, India Government Mumbai, and CPWD. These dependencies have 
caused delays in equipment procurement and infrastructure upgrades, thereby 
impacting the timely execution of several critical projects. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the department to consider a 
decentralized approach for project implementation by empowering regional offices 
with greater autonomy and allocating necessary resources to expedite 
implementation. Advanced project tracking systems should be introduced to facilitate 
real-time monitoring, improve accountability, and proactively identify bottlenecks. 
The Committee also urge the implementation of targeted capacity -building programs 
for state and reg ional agencies to enhance their technical expertise and strengthen 
their execution capabilities.” 
 
1.7 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-  
“All the necessary efforts will be made to  ensure that funds allocated for 
procurement of equipment, construction of laboratory buildings and capacity building 
of Legal Metrology officers of States/ UTs/ UoI will be judiciously utilized in time 

3 
 
without compromising on quality.   It will be ensured that the funds estimated are 
spend to reduce the chances of surrender of funds. 
The Department will closely monitor the progress implementation and will 
make every sincere effort to get the funds utilised. 
   
        The Committee’s observations regarding underutilization of funds under Central 
Sector Schemes due to dependencies on various implementing agencies are 
acknowledged. To address this, the Department is moving towards a decentralized 
approach by empowering regional offices, including RRSLs and IILM, Ranchi with 
greater autonomy for project exe cution. This is expected to reduce delays in 
procurement and infrastructure development and improve overall implementation 
efficiency. 
 
          Further, advanced project monitoring systems are being developed for real -
time tracking and early identificati on of bottlenecks. Targeted capacity -building 
programs are also being conducted for State and regional agencies to strengthen 
their technical and operational capabilities. These measures will ensure improved 
fund utilization and timely completion of key projects.” 
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs) OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 
1.8 The Committee note  that the Government’s  acknowledgement of the concerns 
raised regarding the underutilization of funds under Central Sector Schemes during 
2022-23 and 2023 -24, particularly the challenges posed by dependencies on various 
agencies which have led to delays in equipment procurement  and infrastructure 
development. 
The Committee are happy to note that the Department is taking concrete steps 
towards a decentralized approach by empowering regional offices such as RRSLs and 
IILM, Ranchi, with greater autonomy.  The Committee hope that the move will address 
bottlenecks and facilitate timely execution of projects.  Further, the development of 
advanced project monitoring systems aimed at real -time tracking and early 
identification of implementation is a positive shift towards enhanced accoun tability 
and transparency. 
The Committee also acknowledge the department efforts being made on  the 
capacity-building initiatives targeted at State and regional agencies to augment their 
technical and operational capabilities, which  is essential for stren gthening project 
implementation at the grassroots level. 
However, the Committee are of the considered view that the Department’s 
response would have been more satisfactory if it had delineated clear timelines for the 
implementation of these reforms, as wel l as the specific extent and nature of 
autonomy to be granted to regional offices.  
 

4 
 
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No.3.21) 
B. Consumer Protection Cell 
 
1.9 The Committee in their original report observed/ recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee acknowledge the establishment of e -daakhil platform which has 
simplified the adjudication process but note a very poor percentage of 23% of 
resolution of the registered cases.   The Committee feel that the system may not be 
useful if it does not facilitate an expeditio us disposal of complaints. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to form a dedicated monitoring cell to track the 
performance metrics and ensure the adherence to timelines.” 
 
1.10 The Ministry in its Action Taken reply has stated as under:-  
“E-daakhil is primarily designed as a platform to facilitate the online filing of cases, 
providing consumers with the convenience to register complaints from anywhere at 
any time. Its core function is to simplify case filing process, eliminating the need for 
physical visits and reducing time spent in this initial step. Furthermore, e -daakhil has 
been upgraded to e -Jagriti incorporating the latest technical features to enhance its 
functionality and performance. This upgrade aims to further streamline the case 
management process, providing improved tools for both consumers and judicial 
bodies to track and manage complaints effectively.      Further, in terms of Section 38 
(7) of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, every complaint shall be   disposed of as 
expeditiously a s possible and endeavour shall be made to decide the complaint 
within a period of three months from the date of receipt of notice by opposite party 
where the complaint does not require analysis or testing of commodities and within 
five months if it require s analysis or testing of commodities. To serve the interest of 
speedy justice to the end consumers, Consumer Protection Act states that no 
adjournment shall ordinarily be granted by the consumer commissions unless 
sufficient cause is shown and the reasons for grant of adjournment have been 
recorded in writing by the Commission.” 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs) OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 
1.11 The Committee note the Government’s explanation that the e -daakhil platform 
primarily serves as a convenient and accessible online portal for consumers to file 
complaints, reducing the need for physical visits and easing the initial filing process. 
The Committee also appreciate the upgrade t o the enhanced e -Jagriti system, which 
promises better tools for case management and monitoring. 
However, the Committee remain concerned about the persistently low 
resolution rate of 23% of the registered cases on the platform. While the reply 
highlights t he legal mandate under Section 38(7) of the Consumer Protection Act, 
2019, for expeditious disposal of complaints and restrictions on adjournments, it does 

5 
 
not provide substantive information on steps being taken to address the backlog or 
accelerate case resolution. 
Importantly, the Government has not addressed the Committee’s key 
recommendation for the establishment of a dedicated monitoring cell to track 
performance metrics, ensure adherence to timelines, and proactively identify and 
resolve bottlenecks in the grievance redressal process. 
The Committee emphasize that digitization alone, while beneficial for ease of 
filing complaints, must be complemented by robust monitoring and administrative 
measures to ensure timely justice for consumers. The Committee,  therefore, reiterate 
their original recommendation for a dedicated monitoring mechanism and urge the 
Department to take urgent and concrete steps to improve the case resolution rate and 
reduce pendency. 
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No.3.39) 
 
C. CONFONET  
 
1.12 The Committee in their original report observed/ recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the CONFONET initiative, aimed at modernizing 
consumer grievance redressal through ICT infrastructure, has shown promise with 
the launch of the e -Jagriti platform and the installation of hybrid video conferencing 
(VC) facilities. However, the Committee is dismayed to learn the significant delays in 
achieving the target of installing VC facilities at 45 locations by March 2024, as 
installation has been mad e in only six benches at the National Consumer Disputes 
Redressal Commission (NCDRC).   The Committee also find that the fund 
underutilization is a matter of concern, as ₹30.79 crore allocated in the 2023 -24 
fiscal year went unspent due to incomplete tasks.  The Committee, therefore, urge 
that these issues be addressed immediately and strongly recommend for setting up 
of a dedicated project management unit (PMU) within the Department of Consumer 
Affairs to oversee the progress of such projects and enforce adherence to timelines.“  
 
1.13 The Ministry in its Action Taken reply has stated as under :- 
“It was proposed to complete the VC facility installation at 45 locations of Consumer 
Commissions before 15th March, 2024 and the fund allocated for VC facility were  
planned to be utilized in financial year 2023 -24.However, despite best efforts by the 
Department, the VC facility could only be got installed only in 06 benches of NCDRC 
by NIC which was the implementing agency of the project. As per the terms and 
conditions of GeM, payment can only be released after 100% delivery. Therefore the 
funds could not be released in 2023 -24. Department has taken note of the 
circumstances which had resulted in the non -utilization of the fund and in future all 
necessary steps would be taken to ensure that the funds are completely utilized.” 
   [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs) OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 

6 
 
1.14 The Committee acknowledge the Department’s explanation regarding the 
delays in installation of video conferencing facilities under the CONFONET initiative 
and the consequent underutilization of funds due to payment release conditions 
under GeM. However, th e Committee find the reply to be inadequate and lacking in 
concrete measures to address the core issues raised. 
The failure to meet the target of installing VC facilities at 45 locations by the 
stipulated deadline, with only six installations completed, highlights significant 
project management and implementation deficiencies. The Committee’s specific 
recommendation for the establishment of a dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU) 
within the Department to monitor progress, enforce adherence to timelines,  and 
coordinate with implementing agencies remains unaddressed.  
The Committee once again reiterating their earlier recommendation and urge 
the Department to move beyond general assurances and come up with a detailed 
action plan with clear timelines  for co mpletion of pending installations  alongwith 
establishment of PMUs.  
 
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No.3.49) 
D. Price Stablisation Fund 
 
1.15 The Committee in their original report observed/ recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the BE allocation of ₹1500 crore for PSF in 2022 -23 was 
reduced to ₹0.01 crore at Revised Estimates stage as the approval of the scheme 
for continuation in the 15th Finance Commission award period was pending and the 
scheme  has been approved on 18.9.2024 as a sub -component of the umbrella 
scheme of PM -AASHA. During previous two years, sale proceeds from previous 
PSF operations accrued to the PSF Corpus were utilized to meet the expenditure 
requirement for procurement/disposal activities of various PSF operations.  Further, 
stock of pulses were transferred from PSS of Department of Agriculture and 
Farmers’ Welfare (DAFW) to PSF of Department of Consumer Affairs on credit 
basis.  During FY 2024 -25 , till the end of 2nd Qtr,   Rs. 5000 crore, out of allocated 
₹10000 crore, has been utilized for paying pending payment of previous and ongoing 
PSF operations.  The department has stated that the tentative requirement would be 
₹ 6463.50 crore on which ₹ 5000 core is to be met from   BE/RE and rest from sale 
proceeds/PSF corpus.    However, the Committee note that reliance on sale 
proceeds and transfers from the Price Support Scheme (PSS) could lead to delays 
in addressing market exigencies. The Committee recommend to conduct a thorough 
need assessment to determine the required allocation to the PSF taking into account 
factors such as size of the population, the level of price volatility on the effectiveness 
of existing price stabilization mechanism and desire that the Department to ensure 
stable and sufficient annual allocations for PSF so  as to reduce dependency on ad 
hoc funding mechanisms such as sale proceeds.” 

7 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.16 The Ministry in its Action Taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“The observation and recommendations of the committed is noted for 
compliance.PSF Operations are dynamic in nature and depend on market scenario. 
The primary purpose of PSF operations are not to replace the market, but to nudge 
the market players towards a stable price regime. The PSF market interventions are 
broadly based on buffer sto cking for subsequent release to stabilise volatility in 
prices and volatility in prices mainly occurs due to seasonality in production, annual 
variations in production, trade disruptions etc. Calibrated release of pulses through 
open market sale to infuse stocks in the market and retail interventions by selling 
dals at subsidized prices to consumers.”  
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs) OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 
1.17 The Committee acknowledge the Government’s detailed explanation regarding 
the dynamic nature of Price Stabilization Fund (PSF) operations and the challenges 
posed by market fluctuations. While appreciating the operational nuances highlighted, 
the Committee observe that the response does not fully address the critical issue of 
ensuring stable and sufficient budgetary allocations to the PSF. Reliance on sale 
proceeds and transfers from other schemes, as pointed out, can indeed lead to delays 
and unpredictability in responding to market exigencies. 
The Committee reiterate the importance of conducting a thorough and data -
driven need assessment for the PSF, factoring in population size, price volatility, and 
the effectiveness of current stabilization mechanisms. Such an assessment is 
essential to enable the Department to make informed decisions on annual budget 
allocations, thereby reducing dependency on ad hoc funding arrangements. 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to take proactive steps towards 
instituting a predictable and robust financial framework for the PSF, ensuring timely 
interventions in the market that protect both producers and consumers from undue 
price shocks.  
 
Recommendation No. 12 (Para No.3.77) 
 
E. National Test House (NTH) 
1.18 The Committee in their original report observed/ recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the major projects and schemes currently under 
implementation at NTH are limited to a few cities, such as Ghaziabad, Kolkata, 
Bengaluru, Jaipur, Guwahati, and Mu mbai, among others. Given the vast potential 
for expansion, the Committee recommend that at least one testing center or facility 
of NTH be established in each state. To achieve this, the Committee further 

8 
 
recommend an increased allocation of funds under th e NTH (National Test House) 
scheme, along with its effective utilization, to facilitate the upgradation and 
expansion of testing facilities across the country.” 
1.19 The Ministry in their Action Taken reply has stated as under:- 
“NTH facilities have been set up based on functional need of industry and provide 
services in different geographical regions. However, to meet the growing demand for 
testing, calibration, and quality evaluation services in emerging sectors, NTH 
assesses the  need and potential and is expanding its services to more sectors and 
regions. In the recent past, two satellite centres were established in Varanasi (2021) 
and Bengaluru (2024) as part of this effort.  
NTH is committed to making the best use of available resources and is working 
toward the gradual expansion of its footprint. NTH will continue to explore all possible 
avenues for the effective utilization of funds to strengthen the facilities and enhance 
the reach across the country. The establishment of new  testing centers would 
necessitate not only the expansion of current facilities but also recruitment and 
training of additional technical staff and procurement of advanced testing equipment. 
In this context, allocation of increased funding under the NTH sc heme, as 
recommended by the Committee, would help in supporting the required infrastructure 
upgrades and the establishment of additional facilities.” 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs) OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 
1.20 The Committee note the Government’s response which reflects a broad 
acceptance of the recommendation concerning the expansion of the National Test 
House (NTH) network. The Committee are encouraged to learn that NTH i s actively 
assessing regional needs and has initiated expansion efforts with the establishment 
of satellite centres in Varanasi (2021) and Bengaluru (2024). The acknowledgement 
that enhanced financial allocation under the NTH scheme would support such 
expansion is also noted positively. 
However, the Committee observe that the reply lacks a concrete roadmap or 
specific commitment towards the establishment of at least one testing facility in each 
State, which formed the essence of the Committee’s recommendati on. The Committee 
are of the view that while current steps are welcome, they remain piecemeal and 
gradual, and may not sufficiently address regional disparities in access to quality 
testing and calibration services, particularly in underserved and industri ally emerging 
States. 
In view of this, the Committee reiterate their recommendation for a phased and 
time-bound expansion plan to establish at least one NTH facility in each State.  The 
Committee further urge the Department to proactively pursue increased budgetary 
allocation, and to expedite capacity creation in line with the growing demand for 
standardized testing and quality assurance in both traditional and emerging sectors 
of the economy. 
 

9 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No.2.9) 
 
The Committee note that during 2019 -20, actual expenditure was lower than both 
the BE (₹2291.82 crore) and RE (₹2069.50 crore) while in 2020 -21 the RE increased 
significantly from ₹2561.00 crore to ₹12298.91 crore, during 2021 -22 actual expenditure 
was considerably lower than both the BE (3237.60) and RE (₹2717.14 crore) and it was not 
fully utilized, also during 2022 -23 the RE was dramatically reduced from ₹1762.38 crore to 
₹256.55 crore. S uch trends and inconsistencies in the Budget Estimates (BE), Revised 
Estimates (RE), and Actual Expenditures (AE) during the last five fiscal years i.e. 2019 -20 
to 2024 -25 may not be treated as a good sign and shows non -seriousness of the 
Government.   Hence, the Committee strongly recommend the Department to take all 
necessary steps for realistic budget planning and proper execution to align expenditure with 
budgeted amounts during the current financial year and in coming years. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 The Price Stabilisation Fund (PSF) has been set up for strategic market inventions 
to control the volatility in prices of agri -horticultural commodities. Buffer stock of pulses and 
onion are maintained for subsequent release in the market. The quantum o f buffer stock 
acts both as a deterrent for unscrupulous traders as well as an instrument for strategic 
market intervention by releasing in the market to stabilize price volatility. The annual 
budgetary supports for PSF are transferred to the PSF Corpus Fu nd and price stabilisation 
operations involving procurement, storage and disposal of stocks are funded by drawing 
out of the Corpus Fund. Sale proceeds of stocks are ploughed back into the Corpus Fund.  
  
In 2019 -20 (BE) Rs.2,000 crore was allocated under Price Stabilisation Fund which 
was reduced to Rs.1,800 crore in the Revised Estimate due to lack of proposals from North 
Eastern Region for incurring expenditure out of the 10% earmarked fund. In 2020 -21, the 
allocation of Rs.2000 crore at BE stage was rev ised to Rs.11,800 crore in the RE stage to 
meet the requirement for distribution of pulses under PMGKAY during the Covid -19 
pandemic. In 2021-22, the BE allocation under PSF was Rs.2,700 crore which was reduced 
to Rs.2,250 crore in RE against which actual expenditure was Rs.2,031 crore due to lack of 
proposals from North Eastern Region. During 2022 -23 and 2023 -24, only token provision 
were allocated under PSF as sufficient funds were available in the PSF Corpus for 
undertaking price stabilisation interventions. 

10 
 
The annual budgetary allocations for PSF take into account the quantum of balance 
funds available in the PSF Corpus of funds to undertake necessary interventions. 
The  government is committed to protecting the consumers from price volatility by ensuri ng 
afforability of essential food commodities. 
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No.2.21) 
2.3 The Committee note that during 2022 -23 the allocation under Central Sector 
Schemes was dropped from ₹1599 crore at BE to ₹98.34 crore at RE stage.  Further for the 
year 2023-24, AE remained at ₹148.39 crore and RE at ₹182.61 crore, i.e., only 81.26% of 
RE was utilized during 2023 -24.   The Committee find that one of the key factors attributed 
for underutilization of budget is the dependency on various agencies like the National 
Physical Laboratory, Fluid Control Research Institute, ISRO, C -DAC, India Government 
Mumbai, and CPWD. T hese dependencies have caused delays in equipment procurement 
and infrastructure upgrades, thereby impacting the timely execution of several critical 
projects. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the department to consider a 
decentralized approach for  project implementation by empowering regional offices with 
greater autonomy and allocating necessary resources to expedite implementation. 
Advanced project tracking systems should be introduced to facilitate real -time monitoring, 
improve accountability, a nd proactively identify bottlenecks. The Committee also urge the 
implementation of targeted capacity -building programs for state and regional agencies to 
enhance their technical expertise and strengthen their execution capabilities. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.4 All the necessary efforts will be made to  ensure that funds allocated for procurement 
of equipment, construction of laboratory buildings and capacity building of Legal Metrology 
officers of States/ UTs/ UoI will be judiciously utilized in time witho ut compromising on 
quality.  It will be ensured that the funds estimated are spend to reduce the chances of 
surrender of funds. 
The Department will closely monitor the progress implementation and will make 
every sincere effort to get the funds utilised. 
   
        The Committee’s observations regarding underutilization of funds under Central 
Sector Schemes due to dependencies on various implementing agencies are 
acknowledged. To address this, the Department is moving towards a decentralized 
approach by empo wering regional offices, including RRSLs and IILM, Ranchi with greater 

11 
 
autonomy for project execution. This is expected to reduce delays in procurement and 
infrastructure development and improve overall implementation efficiency. 
 
          Further, advanc ed project monitoring systems are being developed for real -time 
tracking and early identification of bottlenecks. Targeted capacity -building programs are 
also being conducted for State and regional agencies to strengthen their technical and 
operational cap abilities. These measures will ensure improved fund utilization and timely 
completion of key projects. 
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No.2.30) 
 
2.5 The Committee note that there has been persistent underutilization of funds 
allocated to the North Eastern Region (NER), which underscores signifi cant challenges in 
project implementation. The major scheme implemented by the Department is PSF under 
which buffer stock of pulses and onion are created. These crops are mainly produced in 
non NER states, hence the expenses of procurement are booked in no n NER head. In 
order to stabilize the prices,  the release of crop from the buffer stock are made in various 
states including North Eastern States. The Committee note that the limited production of 
essential crops have hindered effective utilization of fund s. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the department should come up with region -specific schemes tailored to 
the unique socio -economic and geographic challenges of the NER. This may include the 
creation of robust local procurement and distribution in frastructure, implementation of an 
effective buffer stock management system, establishment of a robust price forecasting & 
monitoring system to anticipate & respond to price fluctuations as well as incentives to 
promote the regional production of essential  commodities. Furthermore, the department 
should actively collaborate with state governments and local agencies in this regard. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.6 The actual expenditure in NER region under PSF during FY 2024 -25, was Rs. 
670.94 crore out of Rs. 700 crore (RE). To make the scheme more targeted department 
regularly hold meetings with various stakeholders including state government to assess the 
requirement of pulses and onion.  Various initiatives have been taken to make the PSF 
more appropriate to address unique the socio -economic and geographic challenges of the 
NER. A meeting to discuss the issue of availability of warehouses/ storage facilities in North 
Eastern States was held under the Chairpersonship of Secretary (CA) on 23.08.2024 for 
implementation of an effective buffer stock management system. A Round Table 

12 
 
Consultation on Pulses and Horticultural Crops Production in North Eastern Region in the  
context of Food Price Management was organized in Guwahati on 08 th November 2024. 
Further, a study is under process with IIPR, Kanpur, on supply Chain of Pulses in Major 
Pulse Producing States of India with Focus on Eastern State.  
Further to establish a robust price forecasting & monitoring system to anticipate and 
respond to price fluctuations the Department has expanded the number of commodities 
covered under price monitoring from 22 to 38 by adding 16 additional commodities. Further, 
the number of pric e reporting centres has been increased to 555 centres across the 
country. This enhancement helped in timely and focus interventions to stabilize food prices. 
Moving forward, the government will continue to collaborate with state governments to 
expand the n etwork of price monitoring centres, ensuring comprehensive coverage across 
the country. 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No.3.8) 
 
2.7 The Committee note that the budget allocations for consumer awareness programs 
have decreased significantly over the years, with a marked reduction from ₹60.00 crore in 
2020-21 to ₹17.99 crore in 2024 -25. The Committee feel that in view of incre ase in 
fraudulent activities, there is much need of consumer awareness.   Therefore, to enhance 
the effectiveness of consumer awareness initiatives, the Committee recommend the 
Department to provide sufficient budget allocations and also ensure consistent s upport for 
long-term planning and execution. The Committee also urge the Department to amplify 
reach for flagship programs like Jago Grahak Jago in order to ensure sustained impact. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 The recommendations of the Standing Committee  have been duly noted for 
compliance. However, it is to be informed that with increased digitalization over the recent 
years, the Department is preferring mediums  other than traditional media, and therefore 
generating consumer awareness through social medi a at zero dissemination cost. This has 
led to less budget allocation over the years. Further, the Department has been undertaking 
initiatives viz. collaborating with stakeholders Ministries/Departments/organizations like 
FSSAI, I4C, etc. as well as State-wise VC interaction with Panchayats on consumer issues, 
preferably in the official language of States for amplified outreach. 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 
 

13 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No.3.15) 
  
2.9 The Committee commend the Integrated Consumer Grievance Redressal System 
(ICGRS) for its remarkable success in expanding grievance registration and resolution. 
However, they express concern  over the considerable backlog of unresolved cases in 
consumer commissions. Of the 28,84,261 cases filed since inception, only 23,37,152 have 
been resolved, leaving nearly 19% of cases pending. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend for prioritizing the acceleration of case resolutions through measures such as 
establishing additional    benches   and    implementing   fast-track   mechanisms.   They 
also emphasize the need for effectively handling the increasing volume of grievances by 
enhancing infrastructure, including the expansion of call center operations. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 The Consumer Protection Act, 2019 provides for a three tier quasi-judicial machinery 
at District, State and Central levels commonly known as “Consumer Commissions”  for 
protection of the rights of consumers and to provide simple and speedy redressal of 
consumer disputes. 
 
Further, in terms of Section 38 (7) of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, every 
complaint shall be disposed of as expeditiously as possible and end eavour shall be made 
to decide the complaint within a period of three months from the date of receipt of notice by 
opposite party where the complaint does not require analysis or testing of commodities and 
within five months if it requires analysis or testing of commodities. 
  
To serve the interest of speedy justice to the end consumers, Consumer Protection 
Act states that no adjournment shall ordinarily be granted by the consumer commissions 
unless sufficient cause is shown and the reasons for grant of adj ournment have been 
recorded in writing by the Commission. 
  
In order to reduce pendency, both State Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commissions and District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions participated in the 
Grahak Madhyasthata Samadhan and National Lok Adalats to resolve consumer disputes 
through mediation for providing speedy and amicable resolutions to consumer grievances. 
  
In addition, e -dakhil portal has also been launched for online filing of consumer 
complaints. Besides physical hearing, video  conferencing facility has also been provided at 
National and State level Consumer Commissions for speedy disposal of the cases. 
  
The CONFONET 1.0 project has been revamped to NextGen CONFONET 2.0 to 
address key challenges such as outdated technology, non -standardized workflows and 
limited automation. The new platform, named as “e -Jagriti”, aims to enhance consumer 
grievance redressal through a micro -service architecture, AI/ML integration and latest 
features like faceless onboarding and role -based dashboa rds. It will unify existing 
applications (OCMS, e -Daakhil, NCDRC CMS, CONFONET application) into a single, 
scalable system that will significantly benefit consumers by enabling them to file complaints 
seamlessly from anywhere, anytime with multi -lingual support. The integrated platform will 

14 
 
streamline the grievance redressal process, offering faster resolution and enhanced 
transparency. With features like AI -driven analytics, automated workflows  and real -time 
updates, consumers will experience more efficien t handling of their cases and improved 
access to case statuses and decisions. The revamped system will also support real -time 
data access, automated workflows and offer enhanced participation tools for other 
stakeholders like judges, advocates etc. 
 
The De partment has also successfully revamped the National Consumer Helpline 
(NCH), enhancing accessibility, efficiency, and technological capabilities to address 
consumer grievances at the pre -litigation stage. Now available in 17 languages, including 
Hindi, En glish, and regional languages, the NCH provides multiple complaint registration 
channels: toll -free number 1915, WhatsApp (8800001915), SMS, email, NCH app, web 
portal (consumerhelpline.gov.in), and Umang app. It operates from 8 AM to 8 PM, seven 
days a week, with a call-back facility and exclusive call center for prompt resolution. 
 
The NCH collaborates with companies on a voluntary basis, known as convergence 
partners, to facilitate quicker grievance resolution. The number of convergence partners 
has grow n from 263 in 2017 to 1,042 till date, reflecting growing trust. The NCH’s call -
handling capacity has increased exponentially, with calls rising from 12,553 in December 
2015 to 1,55,138 in December 2024, and monthly complaints surging from 37,062 in 2017 
to 1,12,468 in 2024. Grievances registered via WhatsApp grew from 3% in March 2023 to 
18% in December 2024. 
 
Technological advancements under the NCH 2.0 initiative, such as AI -based Speech 
Recognition, Translation Systems, and an AI -enabled Chatbot, have b een introduced to 
streamline the grievance process, making it more seamless and inclusive. These 
innovations allow complaints through voice input in local languages and offer real -time 
assistance. The NCH website has also been enhanced for better navigatio n and faster 
resolution. 
 
The revamp of the NCH has resulted in a more accessible, efficient, and inclusive 
grievance redressal system. The Department remains committed to continuous 
improvements to meet the evolving needs of consumers and ensure timely re solution at the 
pre-litigation stage. 
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No.3.21) 
  
2.11 The Committee acknowledge the establishment of e -daakhil platform which has 
simplified the adjudication process but note a very poor percentage of 23% of resolution of 
the registered cases.   The Committee feel that the system may not be useful if it does not 
facilitate an expeditious disposal of complaints. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry 
to form a dedicated monitoring cell to track the performance metrics and ensure the 
adherence to timelines. 

15 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 E-daakhil is primarily designed as a platform to fa cilitate the online filing of cases, 
providing consumers with the convenience to register complaints from anywhere at any 
time. Its core function is to simplify case filing process, eliminating the need for physical 
visits and reducing time spent in this initial step. Furthermore, e-daakhil has been upgraded 
to e -Jagriti incorporating the latest technical features to enhance its functionality and 
performance. This upgrade aims to further streamline the case management process, 
providing improved tools for b oth consumers and judicial bodies to track and manage 
complaints effectively.      Further, in terms of Section 38 (7) of the Consumer Protection 
Act, 2019, every complaint shall be   disposed of as expeditiously as possible and 
endeavour shall be made to de cide the complaint within a period of three months from the 
date of receipt of notice by opposite party where the complaint does not require analysis or 
testing of commodities and within five months if it requires analysis or testing of 
commodities. To ser ve the interest of speedy justice to the end consumers, Consumer 
Protection Act states that no adjournment shall ordinarily be granted by the consumer 
commissions unless sufficient cause is shown and the reasons for grant of adjournment 
have been recorded in writing by the Commission. 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No.3.22) 
 
2.13 The Committee opine that strengthening the system's technological infrastructure, 
launching consumer awareness campaigns, and ensuring adequate staffing and resource 
allocation are essential steps that should be prioritized to improve the system’s efficiency 
and ensure timely justice for consumers and therefore recommend to conduct periodic 
performance reviews to identify bottlenecks, and provide targeted training for Consumer 
Commission members. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The Department is making continuous efforts to improve the system’s efficiency and 
ensure timely justice for consumers. In particular, the department has been closely 
monitoring the impact of the recently provided video conferencing systems  to 35 State 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions (SCDRCs) and 10 benches in National 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (NCDRC) benches. This exercise is aimed at 
evaluating its impact identifying potential bottlenecks and ensuring that the technol ogy is 
used effectively. The Commissions are encouraged to optimally utilize this facility to 
streamline the case adjudication process. Additionally, the department regularly interacts 

16 
 
with the Consumer Commissions to gather feedback on the recently launch ed upgraded 
eJagriti portal. This portal incorporates the latest technical features to improve case 
management. It’s primarily the responsibility of the State Governments to fill up the 
vacancies in the state and district level consumer commissions and providing sufficient staff 
to them. However, this department is continuously engaging with the State Governments in 
order to expedite the process. 
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No.3.29) 
 
2.15 The Committee observe that under the Strengthening of Consumer Commissions 
(SCC) Scheme, delays and deficiencies in proposals submitted by States and UTs, 
including non-compliance with SCC guidelines and incomplete documentation, have 
hindered the effective utilization of funds. Despite efforts to address the issue, the 
challenge of pending utilization certificates (UCs) persists, obstructing the release of new 
funds, with ₹2,303.13 lakh still pending as on 30.09.2024. This situation has contributed to 
a reduction in budget allocations, with only ₹5.00 crore designated for 2024 -25, potentially 
jeopardizing the long -term goals of the SCC. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Department to adopt more proactive and structured approach. States and UTs should be 
provided with capacity -building workshops to ensure timely and compliant submission of 
proposals, supported by a centralized tracking system to monitor progress and id entify 
bottlenecks.  Further, the Committee suggest the department to explore the possibility of 
dynamically reallocating unutilized funds from underperforming regions to states 
demonstrating readiness and compliance, ensuring optimal resource deployment. Regular 
audits and escalations of unresolved UC issues should also be enforced to ensure 
accountability and streamline fund disbursement processes. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.16 The recommendation of the Committee has been duly noted.  
(i) Under the SCC scheme, the funds are released to states/U.Ts on the basis of 
proposals received from respective states/U.Ts complying with all the pre -
requisites as laid down in the scheme guideline. As such, on receipt of eligible 
proposals satisfying all the pre -conditions, the necessary funds are released 
to states/U.Ts. The matter regarding the submission of eligible proposals 
under the SCC scheme is regularly taken up with the concerned state 
government representatives. This entails regular letters from the department, 
D.O letters from higher officers, Specific VC Meetings etc. to discuss the 
various challenges faced by states in the domain of consumer protection. 
Likewise, the issue of pending UCs is being taken up regularly with the 
concerned states/UTs by the Department. In this regard, various VC meetings 

17 
 
have taken place with the concerned States/UTs. Such efforts has resulted 
into continuous significant decline in the amount of pending UCs. 
  
(ii) As per the guidelines and terms & condition of Consumer Welfare Fund 
(CWF), all the concerned states have to furnish the Utilization Certificate by 
the end of financial year. All the concerned States/UTs have furnished the 
UCs. 
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No.3.39) 
 
2.17 The Committee note that the CONFONET initiative, aimed at modernizing consumer 
grievance redressal through ICT infrastructure, has shown promise with the launch of the e-
Jagriti platform and the installation of hybrid video conferencing (VC) facilities. However, 
the Committee is dismayed to learn the significant delays in achieving the target of 
installing VC facilities at 45 locations by March 2024, as installation has been made in only 
six benches at the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (NCDRC).   The 
Committee also find that the fund underutilization is a matter of concern, as ₹30.79 crore 
allocated in the 2023-24 fiscal year went unspent due to incomplete tas ks. The Committee, 
therefore, urge that these issues be addressed immediately and strongly recommend for 
setting up of a dedicated project management unit (PMU) within the Department of 
Consumer Affairs to oversee the progress of such projects and enforce adherence to 
timelines.   
Reply of the Government 
2.18 It was proposed to complete the VC facility installation at 45 locations of Consumer 
Commissions before 15th March, 2024 and the fund allocated for VC facility were planned 
to be utilized in financial year 2023-24.However, despite best efforts by the Department, the 
VC facility could only be got installed only in 06 benches of NCDRC by NIC which was the 
implementing agency of the project. As per the terms and conditions of GeM, payment can 
only be relea sed after 100% delivery. Therefore the funds could not be released in 2023 -
24. Department has taken note of the circumstances which had resulted in the non -
utilization of the fund and in future all necessary steps would be taken to ensure that the 
funds are completely utilized. 
   [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 

18 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No.3.49) 
 
2.19 The Committee note that the BE allocation of ₹1500 crore for PSF in 2022 -23 was 
reduced to  ₹0.01 crore at Revised Estimates stage as the approval of the scheme for 
continuation in the 15th Finance Commission award period wa s pending and the 
scheme  has been approved on 18.9.2024 as a sub -component of the umbrella scheme of 
PM-AASHA. During previous two years, sale proceeds from previous PSF operations 
accrued to the PSF Corpus were utilized to meet the expenditure requiremen t for 
procurement/disposal activities of various PSF operations.  Further, stock of pulses were 
transferred from PSS of Department of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare (DAFW) to PSF of 
Department of Consumer Affairs on credit basis.   During FY 2024 -25 , till  the end of 2nd 
Qtr,  Rs. 5000 crore, out of allocated ₹10000 crore, has been utilized for paying pending 
payment of previous and ongoing PSF operations.  The department has stated that the 
tentative requirement would be ₹ 6463.50 crore on which ₹ 5000 cor e is to be met 
from  BE/RE and rest from sale proceeds/PSF corpus.    However, the Committee note that 
reliance on sale proceeds and transfers from the Price Support Scheme (PSS) could lead 
to delays in addressing market exigencies. The Committee recommend to conduct a 
thorough need assessment to determine the required allocation to the PSF taking into 
account factors such as size of the population, the level of price volatility on the 
effectiveness of existing price stabilization mechanism and desire that t he Department to 
ensure stable and sufficient annual allocations for PSF so as to reduce dependency on ad 
hoc funding mechanisms such as sale proceeds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.20 The observation and recommendations of the committed is noted for 
compliance.PSF Operations are dynamic in nature and depend on market scenario. The 
primary purpose of PSF operations are not to replace the market, but to nudge the market 
players towards a stable price regime. The PSF market interventions are broadly base d on 
buffer stocking for subsequent release to stabilise volatility in prices and volatility in prices 
mainly occurs due to seasonality in production, annual variations in production, trade 
disruptions etc. Calibrated release of pulses through open market sale to infuse stocks in 
the market and retail interventions by selling dals at subsidized prices to consumers.  
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No.3.76) 
  
2.21 The Committee note that currently NTH does not offer services related to the 
regulation certification of radiation emitting devices, such as X -ray and MRI machines, nor 
does it posses the expertise required for these services. The Committee are concerned to 
note a significant gap in the testing and regulatory framework for radiation -emitting medical 
devices, such as X -ray and M RI machines, which are critical to healthcare services. The 
Committee observe that while the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) and the Central 
Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) currently regulate these devices, the 
absence of expertise and ca pacity within the National Test House (NTH) to address these 
concerns limits the scope for comprehensive testing, calibration, and quality assurance. 
  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend for establishing a collaborative 
framework between NTH, AERB, and CDSCO to bridge the identified gaps. Given the 
importance of these devices in modern medical diagnostics, the Committee urge NTH to 
consider developing specialized capabilities to complement existing regulatory efforts and 
consider targeted inves tments in advanced testing infrastructure, staff training programs, 
and partnerships with leading research institutions to strengthen regulatory oversight, 
ensure adherence to safety standards, and safeguard public health. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.22 NTH is a premier scientific institution in the country, specializing in testing, 
calibration, and quality evaluation across a wide range of sectors, including industry, 
commerce, and trade, adhering to international and national standards in these areas. 
However, our current expertise and infrastructure are not focused on medical testing, 
specifically for radiation -emitting medical devices. As a result, we do not possess the 
specialized knowledge and resources required to address the regulatory and testing nee ds 
of devices such as X-ray and MRI machines, which are critical to healthcare services. 
  
While agencies like the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) and the Central 
Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) currently oversee the regulation of these 
devices, there is a need to develop sufficient capacity and expertise to offer comprehensive 
testing, calibration, and quality assurance for such devices. 
  
In response to the Committee's recommendation, NTH is committed to exploring a 
collaborative framewo rk with AERB and CDSCO to address the identified gaps and 
strengthen regulatory oversight, ensuring compliance with safety standards, and 
safeguarding public health. 
  
NTH is making targeted investments in advanced testing infrastructure, as well as 
staff training programs, and exploring partnerships with leading research institutions to 
enhance our knowledge and build the necessary capacity in the country. NTH remains 
committed to supporting national regulatory efforts and upholding safety standards across  

20 
 
all sectors within our mandate. NTH will continue to engage with relevant stakeholders to 
explore potential areas of collaboration and development. 
  
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 
 
 Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No.3.77) 
 
2.23 The Committee note that the major projects and schemes currently under 
implementation at NTH are limited to a few cities, such as Ghaziabad, Kolkata, Bengaluru, 
Jaipur, Guwahati, and Mumbai, among others. Given the vast potential for expansion, the 
Committee recommend that at least one testing center or facility of NTH be established in 
each state. To achieve this, the Committee further recommend an increased allocation o f 
funds under the NTH (National Test House) scheme, along with its effective utilization, to 
facilitate the upgradation and expansion of testing facilities across the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.24 NTH facilities have been set up based on functiona l need of industry and provide 
services in different geographical regions. However, to meet the growing demand for 
testing, calibration, and quality evaluation services in emerging sectors, NTH assesses the 
need and potential and is expanding its services to more sectors and regions. In the recent 
past, two satellite centres were established in Varanasi (2021) and Bengaluru (2024) as 
part of this effort.  
NTH is committed to making the best use of available resources and is working 
toward the gradual expans ion of its footprint. NTH will continue to explore all possible 
avenues for the effective utilization of funds to strengthen the facilities and enhance the 
reach across the country. The establishment of new testing centers would necessitate not 
only the ex pansion of current facilities but also recruitment and training of additional 
technical staff and procurement of advanced testing equipment. In this context, allocation of 
increased funding under the NTH scheme, as recommended by the Committee, would help 
in supporting the required infrastructure upgrades and the establishment of additional 
facilities. 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-13/1/2024-P&C  dated 14.05.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
-   NIL  - 
 
 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER - V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                    Kanimozhi Karunanidhi, 
27 July, 2025                               Chairperson, 
05 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)                                                  Standing Committee on  
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
  

24 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
MINUTES OF THE  FOURTEENTHSITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024 -2025) HELD ON 
THURSDAY, 17THJULY, 2025 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘B’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat - In the Chair  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Malvika Devi 
3. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
4. Shri Manoj Kumar 
5. Shri Neeraj Maurya 
6. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu 
7. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh 
8.  Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane 
9.  Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
 
   
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
      10.  Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
      11.  Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
      12.  Shri Arun Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi                 - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi                 - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                 - Deputy Secretary 
 

25 
 
2. In the absence of Chairperson, members of the Committee who were present chose 
amongst themselves Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat, MP to act as Chairperson for the sitting in 
terms of Rule 258(3) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
3. The Committee then considered the following draft Reports:- 
(i) Ninth Report on Action Taken   by   the   Government   on the Observations/  
Recommendations contained in the Fifth  Report of the Committee (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024 -25) of the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs); and 
 
(ii) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  
 
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft  Reports 
without any amendments/modifications. 
 5.  The Committee then authorized Hon’ble Chairperson to finalize and present the 
aforesaid Reports during ongoing session. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
************* 
 
XXXX Matter does not pertain to report 
  

26 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2024-2025) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
(i) Total number of Recommendations:                                                             12 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted                   by the Government : 12 
Recommendation Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 & 12 
(Chapter – II, Total 12)    
Percentage: 100% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not  desire to pursue in view 
of the replies received from the Government: 
Recommendation No. Nil 
(Chapter – III, Total - NIL)  
Percentage : 0% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and   which require reiteration: 
Recommendation No. Nil 
 (Chapter – IV, Total NIL 
Percentage : 0% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the interim replies of the 
Government have been received. 
Recommendation No. Nil 
       (Chapter – V, Total NIL_)  
                       Percentage : 0%

 
 
 