 
 
       STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, 
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024-2025) 
 
 
     
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty Ninth Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‘Regulation of Weights and Measures with specific reference to Dispensing 
Machines at Fuel Stations ’ pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
    December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
  
3 


 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024-2025) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty Ninth Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‘Regulation of Weights and Measures with specific reference to Dispensing 
Machines at Fuel Stations ’ pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.12.2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02.12.2024 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
      December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
 


 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Composition of the Committee 
 
iii 
Introduction 
 
Iv 
Chapter I Report 
 
1 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by Government 
 
6 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government replies 
 
17 
Chapter IV Observation/Recommendation which have not been 
accepted by Government 
 
18 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of Government are still awaited 
 
19 
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the 4th sitting of the Committee (202 4-25) 
held on 28.11.2024 
 
20 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Thirty Ninth Report of the Standing Committee  on 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (2024-25) 
 
                   Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi   -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Anto Antony  3.  Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay  4.  Shri Jaswantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  5.  Smt. Malvika Devi  6.  Shri Manish Jaiswal  7.  Shri Saumitra Khan  8.  Shri Manoj Kumar  9.  Shri Sunil Kumar  10. Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah  11. Shri Ajendra Singh Lodhi  12. Shri Neeraj Maurya  13. Shri Bastipati Nagaraju  14. Shri Haribhai Patel  15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  16. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu  17. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh  18. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh  19. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane  20. Dr. Indra Hang Subba  21. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan   
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
24. Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
25. Shri Baburam Nishad 
26. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Vacant 
29. Vacant  
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai       -          Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   -  Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan            - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Abdul Khan  - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
(iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs , Food  and 
Public Distribution (2024-2025) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Third Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Ninth Report of the 
Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on  the subject ‘ Regulation of Weights and 
Measures with specific reference to Dispensing Machines at Fuel Stations ’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution ( Department of 
Consumer Affairs)}. 
 
2.   The Thirty Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
07.02.2024. The Government has furnished its replies indicating Action Taken on the 
recommendations contained in the Report on 10.07.2024. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
28.11.2024. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                        Kanimozhi Karunanidhi, 
28 November, 2024                    Chairperson, 
07 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                           Standing Committee on  
    Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER - I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Ninth Report of the Committee 
(2023-2024), (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject, ‘Regulation of Weights and Measures with 
specific reference to Dispensing Machines at Fuel Stations’ pertaining to the Department of 
Consumer Affairs.  
1.2 The Thirty Ninth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in  the Rajya Sabha 
on 07.02.2024.   It contained 09 Observations/ Recommendations.  
1.3 Action taken replies in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received and categorized as follows:- 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 & 9 
Total: 09 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies: 
 Para No.: Nil                                                                    Total: 0 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies   of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Para No.: Nil                                    Total: 0 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
  Para No.: Nil 
                                                                                                                                 Total: 0 
  Chapter-V 

2 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the implementation 
of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government.  The Committee 
desire that final action taken notes  to the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in Chapter I of this Report should be furnished to them not later than three months of 
the presentation of this Report.    
1.5 The Committee will now deal wit h action-taken by the Government on some of their 
Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
1.6  The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
The Committee note that there has been a shift towards the adoption of  digital 
solutions and technology for the process of verification, inspection and monitoring of 
weighing and measuring instruments. The Committee desire that a system should be 
constructed wherein all fuel dispensed should be monitored and any irregulariti es in the 
process be reported instantly to the concerned agencies. As Central Consumer Protection 
Authority (CCPA) is authorized to regulate matters relating to violation of rights of consumers 
and unfair trade practices, the Committee, therefore, recommen d that in the event of such 
irregularity in the fuel station, an instant alert should go to the agency, i.e. the CCPA for its 
necessary action. 
  
1.7    In its action-taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
 
“The Government emphasizes its commitment  to leveraging digital solutions for real -
time monitoring of fuel dispensing activities. Implementing a system that alerts the 
CCPA or relevant enforcement agencies about irregularities ensures swift intervention 
and appropriate action against any violatio ns of consumer rights or unfair trade 
practices at fuel stations.   Government is working closely with relevant stakeholders 
i.e. Oil Marketing Companies and Retail Outlet Dealers for implementation of this 
recommendation effectively, fostering a fair and t rustworthy marketplace for all 
consumers.   
        
It will also be ensured that wherever possible/ required in the event of any irregularity 
in the fuel station, information/ case may be filed with Central Consumer Protection 
Authority (CCPA) for necessary action.” 
  

3 
 
1.8  The Committee had specifically recommended that in the event of irregularity in 
the fuel station, an instant alert  should go to the agency, i.e. the CCPA for its 
necessary action.  In response  thereto, the Ministry has expressed its commitment to 
leveraging digital solutions for real-time monitoring of fuel dispensing activities which 
includes implementing a system that alerts the Central Consumer Protection 
Authority (CCPA) or relevant enforcement agencies about irregularities, ensuring 
swift intervention and appropriate action against any violations of consumer rights or 
unfair trade practices at fuel stations.    The Ministry further mentioned that it is 
working closely with relevant stakeholders, such as Oil Marketing Companies  and 
Retail Outlet Dealers, to effectively implement this recommendation, fostering a fair 
and trustworthy marketplace for all consumers.    Additionally, it has been ensured 
that in the event of any irregularities at fuel stations, information or cases may be filed 
with the CCPA for necessary action.    The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
ensure the implementation of  such measures across all fuel stations nationwide to 
maximize its impact and benefit consumers on a large scale. The Committee may be 
apprised of the progress made in this direction and the final outcome accordingly. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
1.9  The Committee had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that Fuel pump calibration is crucial to safeguarding the 
consumer interest and a slight variation of millilitres in the amount of fuel being dispensed 
can add up to several litres of fuel being under-dispensed or over-dispensed. The Committee 
also learn that calibration of fuel dispensing units is done once in 12 months. Also, the 
Government have come up with a unique temper proof technology for such calibration which 
involves secure and consumer-friendly technologies, such as the use of One Time Password 
(OTP) authentication systems involving fuel station operator, fuel station system and second 
operator or system and demonstrates a commitment to enhancing security and protecting 
consumers from fraudulent activities at fuel stations. To accommodate potential delays in 
remote areas with weak signal strength, the validity period of OTPs is extended to provide 
more time in remote areas to receive and input the authentication code, reducing the 

4 
 
likelihood of authentication failures. While the  OTP system significantly enhances 
accountability and security. In this regard, the Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should ensure the scrupulous adherence to the OTP system and meanwhile 
explore the possibility of roping in other advanc e technology for yearly calibration of 
dispensing machines. 
 
1.10   In its action-taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
 
“Government understands the importance of scrupulous adherence to the One Time 
Password (OTP) system for ensuring secure transactions and preventing fraud in 
various sectors, including fuel dispensing. Strengthening the implementation of the 
OTP system has enhanced security measures and bolster consumer trust in the 
accuracy and fairness of fuel transactions. This approach n ot only safeguards against 
unauthorized use but also ensures that consumers receive the correct amount of fuel 
for their purchases, reinforcing transparency and reliability in the fuel dispensing 
process. 
 
Government is committed to explore advanced techno logies for the yearly calibration 
of dispensing machines by adopting state -of-the-art calibration methods to improve 
the accuracy and precision of measurements, aligning with international standards 
and best practices. By leveraging advanced technology, su ch as automated 
calibration systems and remote monitoring capabilities, Government is committed to 
streamline regulatory processes and enhance efficiency in verifying and maintaining 
the accuracy of dispensing machines. These efforts shows the Government's  
dedication to modernize regulatory frameworks and embracing innovative solutions 
that benefit both consumers and industry stakeholders alike.” 
  
1.11  In response to the Committee's recommendation, the Ministry has stated that it 
has been implementing the  OTP system to enhance security measures and bolster 
consumer trust in the accuracy and fairness of fuel transactions and has expressed 
its commitment to exploring advanced technologies for the annual calibration of 
dispensing machines. This effort aims to  improve the accuracy and precision of 
measurements, aligning with international standards and best practices. Additionally, 
the Ministry is leveraging advanced technology, such as automated calibration 
systems and remote monitoring capabilities, to stream line regulatory processes and 
enhance efficiency in verifying and maintaining the accuracy of dispensing machines.  
In this regard, the Committee urge that they may be apprised of the actual steps taken 

5 
 
for adherence and success of the One Time Password (O TP) system for ensuring 
secure transactions and preventing frauds in fuel dispensing and the specific state-of-
the-art calibration methods adopted or explored  by the department to ensure 
measurement accuracy and precision, alignment with international stan dards and the 
impact thereof, along with the implementation status. 
 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
 The Committee observe that in achieving goal of fair practices, the authorities 
and stakeholders face many challenges like accurate measurement, tempering and 
fraud, lack of regular inspection, consumer awareness, difficulties in remote 
monitoring, technological advancement and complex supply chain etc. In 
Committee’s view, in order to address these challenges and ensure fair practices at 
fuel stations, it is essential for Central and State regulatory authorities, fuel retailers, 
consumer advocacy groups and technology providers to work in better coordination. 
The Committee , therefore, recommend that the Government should make efforts to 
bring all these stakeholders on a single platform and establish a coordination 
mechanism involving representatives of all the stakeholders for regulation of fair 
practices with regard to weights and measures relating to dispensing machines at fuel 
stations. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
2.2 Government is committed to bring together all relevant stakeholders, including Central 
and State Legal Metrology authorities, Oil Marketing Companies, fuel retailers, consumer 
advocacy groups, and technology providers, on a unified platform, which are already working 
together. This initiative has established a robust coordination mechanism that involves 
representatives from each sector to regulate fair practi ces related to weights and measures 
in fuel dispensing machines at fuel stations. By fostering collaboration and open 
communication among these stakeholders, Government has developed and enforced 
standardized practices that ensure accuracy and fairness in fuel dispensing, to address 
various concerns and perspectives, leading to more effective and cohesive regulatory 
measures. 
 

7 
 
Creating a transparent and fair environment in the fuel dispensing sector is a primary 
objective of the Government. By ensuring that  fuel is dispensed accurately and consistently, 
the Government aims to protect consumer interests and build trust in the system. This 
initiative is not only enhancing regulatory oversight but also promoting technological 
advancements and innovations in fue l dispensing practices. A well -coordinated and 
transparent system is developed to provide consumers with confidence in the fairness and 
accuracy of fuel measurements, fostering a reliable and trustworthy fuel dispensing sector. 
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/3/2024-P&C  dated 08.07.2024] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
2.3 The Committee understand that Legal Metrology Act 2009 aims to establish 
standards for weig hts and measures and regulate trade and commerce concerning 
goods sold or distributed by weight, measure or number. The Committee appreciate 
the efforts of the Government in amending the provisions of Legal Metrology Act 
through Jan Vishwas (Amendment of P rovisions) Act, 2023 that has a significant 
legislative development. The Committee consider that the amendment in various 
sections of Legal Metrology Act 2009 with regard to penalty sections is a praiseworthy 
effort of the Government. 
 
The Committee are confident that under ‘The Jan Vishwas (Amendment of 
Provisions) Act, 2023’ the decriminalization of large number of minor offences and 
replacing them with monetary penalties will have long term impact in the country. The 
Committee firmly believe that the A ct would not only make lives and businesses 
easier, deter non -compliance, promote fair trade practices, but also reduce judicial 
burden at large. The Committee hope that the Government shall ensure the 
implementation of the Act in letter and spirit so that all these objectives are achieved. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
2.4 The implementation of the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 has made lives simple and 
business operations easy by deterring non -compliance and promoting fair trade practices.   
By establishing clear standards and farming rules for weights and measures, the Act aims to 

8 
 
create a level playing field for businesses and protect consumer rights.   It reduces the 
prevalence of fraudulent practices in the marketplace, ensuring that consumers receive 
accurate and fair measurements in their transactions. 
 
Government is committed to ensure the effective implementation of the Legal 
Metrology Act, 2009 in both letter and spirit.   The achievement of the objectives of the Act, is 
not only fostering a transparent and equitable business environment but also alleviating the 
judicial system's burden by reducing disputes related to weights and measures. The 
Government's commitment to enforcing this Act is crucial in realizing its potential benefits, 
ultimately enhancing trust and fairness in commercial practices across the country. 
   [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/3/2024-P&C  dated 08.07.2024] 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
  
2.5 The Committee note that Advancements in technology have significantly 
impacted weighing and measuring instruments in India over the last decade. These 
advancements have improved accuracy, efficiency and transparency in trade 
transactions. They also note that Oil Marketing Companies (OMC) have upgraded their 
fuel dispensers to meet the updated security features stipulations from Legal 
Metrology and that all new procurements are done as per the latest security upgrades. 
The Committee further note with appreciation that all dispenser  configurations are 
tested thoroughly for software and hardware integrity and security features at Centre 
for Development of Advanced Computing (CDAC), Government of India before 
deployment in Retail Outlets (RO). They hope that the Government and the OMCs  will 
continue their collaborative exercise so as to uphold the interests of consumers. They 
also desire that while patronizing the existing technological breakthroughs, the 
Government should consistently encourage more research to keep pace with the 
march of technology. 
  
 
 
 

9 
 
Reply of the Government 
          
2.6 Government, in collaboration with Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs), is dedicated to 
upholding consumer interests through ongoing cooperative efforts. This partnership aims to 
ensure that consumers receive fair and accurate services at fuel stations, benefiting from the 
latest technological advancements. By maintaining a close working relationship, the 
Government and OMCs strive to enhance the efficiency and transparency of fuel dispensing 
operations, thereby fostering consumer trust and satisfaction. 
 
Furthermore, Government is committed to not only supporting existing technological 
breakthroughs but also actively encouraging continuous research and innovation in the 
sector. Keeping pace with technol ogical advancements is essential to address emerging 
challenges and improve service quality. By promoting ongoing research, the Government 
aims to ensure that the fuel dispensing sector remains at the forefront of technological 
progress, ultimately benefit ing consumers through enhanced accuracy, reliability, and 
convenience in their transactions. 
  
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/3/2024-P&C  dated 08.07.2024] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
2.7 The Committee note that OMCs have implemented their Standard Operating 
practices at the Retail Outlets (ROs) whereby the deliverymen at dispensing units 
have been advised to Show “0” before the delivery is started and that the customers 
visiting fuel stations are made to stand in such a way that they can see the display 
screen directly and that staff at the fuel stations request the customers to see “Zero” 
display on the screen to ensure fair transaction at fuel stations. They also note that 
Complaint / Suggestion books are available at all the Fuel Stations for consumers who 
may raise their grievances w.r.t the facilities / services / or any other issue. While 
appreciating the existence of consumer grievance Redressal system in the Retail 
Outlets (RO s), the Committee desire that the mandate of consumer’s right to be 
protected in all possible ways. The Committee understand that customers visiting fuel 
stations don’t have much time for seeking Redressal of grievances and on many of 

10 
 
the retail outlets, v ehicles are made to park in such a way that the fuel vent of cars 
remain adjacent to the pipes which causes display screen slightly behind the driver’s 
seat and a bit higher for driver’s sight. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
necessary directions should be issued so that display screen at dispensing machines 
are placed to be made visible to the driver and if need be, a longer fuel pipe should be 
used for fuelling the vehicles. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.8 Government understand the importance of protecting consumers' rights in every 
possible way, particularly when they visit fuel stations. It is recognized that customers often 
have limited time to address grievances and the current setup at many retail outlets can 
impede their ability to monitor f uel dispensing accurately.   Specifically, vehicles are often 
parked so that the fuel vent remains adjacent to the pipes, positioning the display screen 
slightly behind the driver’s seat and higher than the driver’s line of sight. This arrangement 
makes it difficult for drivers to verify the amount of fuel being dispensed, potentially leading 
to dissatisfaction and mistrust. 
 
To address these concerns, Government and Oil Marketing Companies issues 
necessary directions time to time ensuring that the display s creens on dispensing machines 
are placed in a manner that is easily visible to drivers to allow consumers to monitor the fuel 
dispensing process conveniently. If required, longer fuel pipes ranges from 3 to 5 meter as 
per standard practice are allowed to b e used to facilitate better positioning of vehicles, 
making the display screens more accessible. The transparency and trust at fuel stations 
ensures that consumers can verify their fuel purchases with ease and confidence. 
  
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/3/2024-P&C  dated 08.07.2024] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
  
2.9 The Committee note that the regulatory framework for weights and measures in 
India is est ablished to ensure accuracy, fairness and transparency in trade 

11 
 
transactions. It encompasses the LM Act and rules that govern the use of measuring 
instruments etc. while acknowledging the significant progress made in these areas. 
The Committee understand t hat there might still be ongoing challenges and 
opportunities for further enhancement in the regulatory landscape of legal metrology 
in the country. Therefore, the Committee desire that regulatory landscape need to be 
adapted to the changes of modern times  to ensure that advancements are harnessed 
effectively while safeguarding consumer interests and maintaining fair trade 
practices. The Committee may be apprised accordingly. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.10 All necessary efforts are made to adopt regulatory landscape to the changes of 
modern times to ensure that advancements are harnessed effectively while safeguarding 
consumer interests and maintaining fair trade practices. 
 
The efforts include integrating advanced technologies such as OTP based calibration,  
magnetic self -destructive pulser, family integrity in dispensing systems, digital payments, 
continuously updating dispensing units to reflect new developments, fostering collaboration 
between Government, Oil marketing Companies, industry and consumer grou ps, and 
enhancing consumer protection through transparency and digital mechanisms. 
 
Additionally, Government in association with Oil Marketing Companies if organizing 
training programs for operators, developed real -time monitoring system and innovations to  
ensure that advancements are effectively harnessed while maintaining fair trade practices 
and safeguarding consumer interests at petrol stations. 
    [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs) OM NO- N-19/3/2024-P&C  dated 08.07.2024] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
  
2.11 The Committee note that there has been a shift towards the adoption of digital 
solutions and technology for the process of verification, inspection and monitoring of 
weighing and measuring inst ruments. The Committee desire that a system should be 
constructed wherein all fuel dispensed should be monitored and any irregularities in 

12 
 
the process be reported instantly to the concerned agencies. As Central Consumer 
Protection Authority (CCPA) is autho rized to regulate matters relating to violation of 
rights of consumers and unfair trade practices, the Committee, therefore, recommend 
that in the event of such irregularity in the fuel station, an instant alert should go to 
the agency, i.e. the CCPA for its necessary action. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.12 The Government emphasizes its commitment to leveraging digital solutions for real -
time monitoring of fuel dispensing activities. Implementing a system that alerts the CCPA or 
relevant enforcement agencies about irregularities ensures swift intervention and appropriate 
action against any violations of consumer rights or unfair trade practices at fuel stations.   
Government is working closely with relevant stakeholders i.e. Oil Marketing Companies and 
Retail Outlet Dealers for implementation of this recommendation effectively, fostering a fair 
and trustworthy marketplace for all consumers.          
 
It will also be ensured that wherever possible/ required in the event of any irregularity 
in the fuel station, information/ case may be filed with Central Consumer Protection Authority 
(CCPA) for necessary action. 
   [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/3/2024-P&C  dated 08.07.2024] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
2.13 The Committee observe that Legal Metrology is the application of legal 
requirements to measurements and measuring instruments to ensure public 
guarantee from the  point of view of security and accuracy of the weighments and 
measurements, to builds confidence in trade, industry & consumer and to create 
harmonious environment for conducting business. They also note that Section 24 
provides for verification and stampi ng of weight or measure. The Act encompasses 

13 
 
various aspects related to metrology, verification and stamping of instruments, 
enforcement and penalties, consumer protection, etc. Being covered under the ambit 
of Legal Metrology Act, 2009, the fuel dispensing pumps also adhere to the standards, 
thus exhibiting consistency and reliability in their measuring system ensuring 
protection of consumer interests at fuel stations. The Committee hope that while 
implementing the Act, the Government will ensure public gu arantee from the point of 
view of accuracy of the weighments and measurements so as to create a harmonious 
atmosphere for trade and industry to flourish and at the same time to build consumer 
trust. 
  
Reply of the Government 
          
2.14 Government is committed to ensure public confidence in the accuracy of weighments 
and measurements by enforcing the Legal Metrology Act, 2009. Accuracy and reliability in 
trade transactions are essential for fostering a conducive environment where both trade and 
industry can thrive. By upholding stringent standards/ provisions of rules and implementing 
effective monitoring mechanisms, the Government aims to instill trust among consumers and 
businesses alike. 
 
Ensuring public guarantee of accuracy not only enhances the cred ibility of 
weighments and measurements but also reinforces fair trade practices. The Government is 
committed to build a harmonious atmosphere where transparency and accountability are 
paramount. This approach not only supports economic growth but also safeguards consumer 
interests, promoting a sustainable and trustworthy marketplace for all stakeholders involved. 
The Government is dedicated to implement and enforce the Legal Metrology Act with these 
principles in mind, ensuring that weighments and measureme nts meet stringent standards 
that inspire confidence and foster prosperity across sectors. 
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/3/2024-P&C  dated 08.07.2024] 
  
 
 

14 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
  
2.15 The Committee note that Fuel pump calibration is crucial to safeguarding the 
consumer interest and a slight variation of millilitres in the amount of fuel being 
dispensed can add up to several litres of fuel being under -dispensed or over -
dispensed. The Committee also learn that calibration of fuel dispensing units is done 
once in 12 months. Also, the Government have come up with a unique temper proof 
technology for such calibration which involves secure and consumer -friendly 
technologies, such as th e use of OTP authentication systems involving fuel station 
operator, fuel station system and second operator or system and demonstrates a 
commitment to enhancing security and protecting consumers from fraudulent 
activities at fuel stations. To accommodate potential delays in remote areas with weak 
signal strength, the validity period of OTPs is extended to provide more time in 
remote areas to receive and input the authentication code, reducing the likelihood of 
authentication failures. While the OTP system significantly enhances accountability 
and security. In this regard, the Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should ensure the scrupulous adherence to the OTP system and 
meanwhile explore the possibility of roping in other advance technology  for yearly 
calibration of dispensing machines. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 Government understands the importance of scrupulous adherence to the One Time 
Password (OTP) system for ensuring secure transactions and preventing fraud in various 
sectors, including fuel dispensing. Strengthening the implementation of the OTP system has 
enhanced security measures and bolster consumer trust in the accuracy and fairness of fuel 
transactions. This approach not only safeguards against unauthorized use but also ensur es 
that consumers receive the correct amount of fuel for their purchases, reinforcing 
transparency and reliability in the fuel dispensing process. 
 
Government is committed to explore advanced technologies for the yearly calibration 
of dispensing machines by adopting state -of-the-art calibration methods to improve the 
accuracy and precision of measurements, aligning with international standards and bes t 
practices. By leveraging advanced technology, such as automated calibration systems and 

15 
 
remote monitoring capabilities, Government is committed to streamline regulatory processes 
and enhance efficiency in verifying and maintaining the accuracy of dispens ing machines. 
These efforts shows the Government's dedication to modernize regulatory frameworks and 
embracing innovative solutions that benefit both consumers and industry stakeholders alike. 
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/3/2024-P&C  dated 08.07.2024] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
2.17 The Committee observe that there have been discussions and efforts towards 
centralized monitoring of fuel stations, especially in terms of technological solutions 
and digital platforms to enhance transparency and efficiency in the fuel industry. The 
Committee applaud the Government for conducting a round table workshop on  
“measurement of petroleum products and related issues” which was held on 
09.06.2023 with stakeholders’ viz. representatives of Oil Marketing Companies, 
representatives of the Petroleum Dealers Associations, Controllers of Legal Metrology 
of all States/ UT s, representative of Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
(C-DAC) and Forest College & Research Institute (FCRI), etc. The Committee note with 
satisfaction that various issues of the Petroleum Retail Outlet Dealers were resolved 
during the workshop. The Committee also note that a meeting with Petroleum Dealers 
Associations, Oil Marketing Companies and State Legal Metrology Departments of 
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu was held on 29.9.2023 to discuss 
and resolve the issues of petro leum dealers and to ensure the correct quantity to the 
consumers. The Committee therefore desire that a concrete plan to monitor the 
functioning of the Retail Outlets all over the country should be brought out in a time 
bound phased manner. The Committee m ay also be apprised about the progress 
made in this direction. 
  
Reply of the Government 

16 
 
2.18 Government is committed to monitor retail outlets across the country leveraging 
provisions already available in the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 and the Legal Metrology 
(General) Rules, 2011. These provisions provide a robust framework for ensuring the 
accuracy and fairness of trade transactions, including fuel dispensing operations. The 
provisions under the Act and Rules provide systematic inspections, audits, and technological 
solutions to monitor compliance with legal metrology requirements. 
 
Progress is monitored at the State and Central Government level by the Legal 
Metrology and Oil Marketing Companies.   This includes implementation of the provisions of 
the Act and Rules, detailing the monitoring mechanisms and establishing clear metrics for 
evaluating compliance. Regular monitoring ensures about the milestones achieved, 
challenges encountered, and corrective measures taken. By adhering to the provisions of the 
Legal Metrology Act and leveraging modern monitoring tools, the Government aims to 
enhance regulatory oversight, protect consumer interests, and foster a fair and transparent 
marketplace across all retail outlets nationwide. 
 
Hence, the regulatory framework developed under the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 and 
the Legal Metrology (General) Rules, 2011 has the comprehensive framework to monitor 
retail outlets across the country.  The advanced technologies such as OTP based calibration, 
magnetic self-destructive pulser, family integrity in dispensing systems and digital payments, 
data analytics for real -time monitoring, has been integrated.   The directions/ advisories/ 
detailed standard operating procedures have been issued. The monitoring system is 
expanded nationwide, prioritizing high-risk areas.  
   
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/3/2024-P&C  dated 08.07.2024] 
  

17 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
-   NIL  - 
 
 
  

18 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER - V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;        (KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI) 
28 November, 2024              Chairperson, 
07 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)         Standing Committee on Consumer  
Affairs and Public Distribution

20 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
MINUTES OF THE  FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (202 4-2025) HELD 
ON THURSDAY,  28TH NOVEMBER, 2024 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘D’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Malvika Devi  
3. Shri Manish Jaiswal  
4. Shri Manoj Kumar  
5. Shri Sunil Kumar  
6. Shri Ajendra Singh Lodhi  
7. Shri Haribhai Patel  
8. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu  
9. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh 
10. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh 
11.Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane 
12. Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
13.Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
      14.Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
      15. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
      16. Shri Baburam Nishad 
      17. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
      18. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                 - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi                 - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                 - Deputy Secretary 
 

21 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for consideration and adop tion of the following Draft 
Reports of the Committee: 
(i) XXXX XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
(ii) XXXX XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
(iii) Third Report on Action Taken   by   the   Government   on the 
Observations/  Recommendations contained in the Thirty Ninth Report 
of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Regulation 
of Weights and Measures with specific reference to Dispens ing 
Machines at Fuel Stations’ of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs); and  
 
(iv) XXXX XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the above mentioned 
Draft Reports of the Committee.  
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft 
Reports without any amendments/modifications.  
5.  The Committee then authorized Hon’ble Chairperson to finalize and present 
the aforesaid Reports. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
XXXX Matter does not pertain to report 
 
 
 
 
 
  

22 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY SEVENTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-2024) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
(i) Total number of Recommendations:                                                             09 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government : 09 
  Para Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 & 9 
(Chapter – II, Total 09)    
Percentage: 100% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not  desire to pursue 
in view of the replies received from the Government: 
Para No. Nil 
(Chapter – III, Total - NIL)  
Percentage : 0% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of  the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Para No. Nil 
 (Chapter – IV, Total NIL 
Percentage : 0% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the interim replies of the 
Government have been received. 
Para No. Nil 
       (Chapter – V, Total NIL_)  
                       Percentage : 0% 
 
 
 