 
 
            STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, 
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024-2025) 
 
 
     
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee ( Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
Demands for Grants (202 5-2026) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
   December, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
  
 
11 


 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024-2025) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee ( Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
Demands for Grants (202 5-2026) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 4.10.2025 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4.12.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 4.12.2025 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
   December, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 


 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Composition of the Committee 
 
(i) 
Introduction 
 
(ii) 
Chapter I Report 
 
1 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by Government 
 
10 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government replies 
 
33 
Chapter IV Observation/Recommendation which have not been 
accepted by Government and require reiteration 
 
34 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of Government are still awaited 
 
35 
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the 16th sitting of the Committee (202 4-25) 
held on 08.09.2025 
 
36 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Seventh Report of the Standing Committee  on 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (2024-25) 
 
                   Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi   -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Anto Antony  3.  Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay  4.  Shri JaswantsinhSumanbhaiBhabhor  5.  Smt. Malvika Devi  6.  Shri Manish Jaiswal  7.  Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa#  8.  Shri Manoj Kumar  9.  Shri Sunil Kumar  10. Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah  11. Shri Ajendra Singh Lodhi  12. Shri Neeraj Maurya  13. Shri BastipatiNagaraju  14. Shri Haribhai Patel  15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  16. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu  17. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh  18. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh  19. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane  20. Dr. Indra Hang Subba  21. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan  RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Shri Prakash ChikBaraik 
24. Shri RambhaiHarjibhaiMokariya 
25. Shri Baburam Nishad 
26. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah* 
29. Shri Kamal Haasan@ 
30. Shri Kanad Purkayastha@ 
31. Smt. Rajathi@ 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi                     -           Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi    -           Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Abdul Khan  - Assistant Committee Officer 
____________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 26.09.2024 vide Bulletin Part II, Para No. 838 dated 26.09.2024. 
* Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah, MP, RS nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.01.2025 Vide Bulletin Part-II, 
Para No.1655 dated 27.01.2025.  
# Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa, MP, LS nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 29.1.2025 Vide 
Bulletin Part-II, Para No.1710 dated 30.1.2025 vice Shri Saumitra Khan, MP, LS. 
@ Shri Kamal Haasan, Shri Kanad Purkayastha and  Smt. Rajathi, MP, RS nominated to the 
Committee w.e.f. 08.08.2025 vide Bulletin Part-II, Para No.3117 dated 13.08.2025 
 
 (i) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs , Food  and 
Public Distribution (2024-2025) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Eleventh Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report 
of the Committee ( Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants (202 5-2026) of 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution ( Department of 
Consumer Affairs). 
 
2.   The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
12.03.2025. The Government has furnished its replies indicating Action Taken on the 
recommendations contained in the Report on 05.06.2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
08.09.2025.  The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix-I 
to the Report. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on Observations/  
Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee is given at             
Appendix-II. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                        Kanimozhi Karunanidhi, 
08 September, 2025                      Chairperson, 
17 Bhadrapada, 1947 (Saka)                                               Standing Committee on  
      Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
(ii) 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER - I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee (202 4-
2025), (18th Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants 202 5-26 of Department of Consumer 
Affairs. 
1.2 The Seventh Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 
12.03.2025.   It contained 19 Observations/ Recommendations.  
1.3 Action taken replies in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received and categorized as follows:- 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 Recommendation Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 , 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 
18 and 19 
Total: 19 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies: 
Recommendation No.:  Nil    
                             Total: 0 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies  of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration: 
Recommendation No.:  Nil        
Total: 0 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
  Recommendation No.:  Nil 
                                                                                                               Total: 0 
  Chapter-V 

2 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the implementation 
of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government.  The Committee 
desire that final action taken notes  to the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in Chapter I of this Report should be furnished to them not later than three months of 
the presentation of this Report.    
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action -taken by the Government on some of their 
Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 2.24) 
A. Budgetary Provisions for Central Sector Schemes  
1.6 The Committee in their original report observed/ recommended as follows:- 
”The Committee note that as against the Demands of ₹327 1.69 crore by the 
Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) an allocation of Budget Estimates (BE) 
2025-26 to fund ₹4,230.82 crore has been made for the department in the fiscal year 
2025-26, which is ₹959.14 crore more than the amount demanded.    The Committee 
further observe that the revised expenditure for 2024 -25 was ₹7,204.50 crore, yet the 
department has demanded a lower BE for 2025 -26. Additionally, the Committee 
express their concern over the consistent reduction in budgetary allocations for key 
schemes, particularly the Price Stabilisation Fund (PSF) and consumer protection 
initiatives. Although there have been assurances of continued funding through sale 
proceeds from PSF operations, the department has failed to assess the exact 
requirements under the scheme. The Committee are also concerned by the 
reductions in allocations for programs such as CONFONET, the Consumer Protection 
Cell (ICGRS), and Weights and Measures (Legal Metrology) . The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Department to adopt  more realistic and cautious budgeting 
practices to avoid the underfunding of critical projects. This may, inter alia, include 
focusing on strategic resource optimization, such as phased implementation and 
prioritization of essential activities. Enhanced c oordination with States/UTs may also 
be ensured along with regular monitoring of expenditure to ensure the effective 
utilization of funds. Furthermore, the Department should consider reallocating surplus 
funds from less critical schemes to address funding gaps in high-priority areas as well 
as ensure that the schemes/ programmes do not suffer due to less allocation and the 
gaps are fulfilled at RE stage. The Committee hence strongly recommend that the 
Department to exercise greater caution in estimating its  demands and take all 
necessary steps to ensure that schemes and programs are not hindered by a lack of 
or under-utilization of allocated funds.” 

3 
 
1.7 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 
“PSF Operations are dynamic in nature and dep end on prevailing market scenario. 
The primary purpose of PSF operations are not to replace the market, but to nudge 
the market players towards a stable price regime. The PSF market interventions are 
broadly based on buffer stocking for subsequent release to stabilise volatility in prices 
arising due to seasonality in production, annual variations in production, trade 
disruptions etc. The annual budgetary allocations for PSF take into account the 
quantum of balance funds available in the PSF Corpus to under take necessary 
interventions. The  government is committed to protecting the consumers from price 
volatility by ensuring availability of essential food commodities at affordable prices. 
 During the FY 2024 -25 budget allocation at RE level was Rs. 7000 cror e of which 
99.60% was utilized for various PSF operation.  
 In this context, it is submitted that the budget allocation under the CONFONET 
scheme for 2024 -25 was increased at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage to address 
the additional funding requirements f or video conferencing facilities in Consumer 
Commissions. Additionally, the enhanced funds were necessary to ensure the 
continuity of ongoing activities under the scheme. For the financial year 2025 -26, the 
Department, in consultation with the Implementing  Agency i.e NIC assessed the 
realistic fund requirements and accordingly proposed an amount of ₹52 crore in the 
Budget Estimates (BE) 2025-26. 
 The Department acknowledges the concern of the Committee regarding the 
reduced allocation for the Integrated Consumer Grievance Redressal System 
(ICGRS) Scheme during 2025 -26. The initial Budget Estimates (BE) for the ICGRS 
Scheme were prepared based on the projected requirements and following a 
rationalization of expenditure to ensure efficient fund utilization.  However, the 
Department is committed to ensuring that the implementation of the scheme is not 
adversely affected. Accordingly, the Department intends to review the fund 
requirements of the ICGRS Scheme during the course of the year and propose an 
enhancement at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage, based on actual progress and 
need. Furthermore, the Department also intends to enhance the funds allocated under 
the ICGRS Scheme during its revalidation for the Sixteenth Finance Commission 
(2026-2031) to support s ystem upgrades, capacity expansion, and improved 
outreach. 
  
 The Department acknowledges the Committee’s concerns regarding reduced 
allocations for Legal Metrology in BE 2025 –26. It is to state that the allocation of 
₹54.30 crore has been made in accordan ce with the approved outlay for the ongoing 
scheme period (2021 -26), with a focus on completing key infrastructure projects, 
modernizing Regional Reference Standards Laboratories (RRSLs) and advancing 
initiatives such as the Time Dissemination Project, Nat ional Legal Metrology Portal 
and software testing facilities. Efficient utilization of available resources and 
prioritization of essential components will ensure that core objectives related to 
consumer protection, regulatory compliance and trade facilitat ion remain 
unaffected. To mitigate any potential impact, the Department has adopted phased 

4 
 
implementation, strengthened coordination with States/UTs and instituted robust 
monitoring mechanisms. The Department is fully committed to maintaining the 
momentum of modernization in Legal Metrology and ensuring that all key initiatives 
are delivered effectively within the available budgetary framework.” 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
 
1.8 The Committee in their recommendation had highlighted a mismatch in the 
budget demand and allocation for the Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) for 
2025–26, with ₹4,230.82 crore allocated against a demand of only ₹3271.69 crore. 
Despite a higher expenditure in 2024 –25, the department sought a lower budget for 
the next year. The Committee were concerned about reduced funding for key schemes 
like the Price Stabilisation Fund and consumer protection programs and had therefore 
stressed for more realistic budgeting, better coordination with States/UTs, 
reallocation of surplus funds from lower -priority schemes, and regular monitoring to 
ensure critical programs are not underfunded or delayed. 
 The Committee have examined the response fur nished by the Department with 
regard to the observation made and note that the Department in its action -taken reply 
has inter alia stated that the Price Stabilisation Fund (PSF) operations are dynamic in 
nature and based on prevailing market conditions. It  was further submitted that 
99.60% of the ₹7000 crore allocation at RE stage during 2024 –25 had been utilized. 
Also  regarding other schemes such as  CONFONET, ICGRS, and Legal Metrology, the 
Department has mentioned enhanced allocations at RE stage, ratio nalization of 
projected needs, phased implementation, and future plans for enhancement under the 
Sixteenth Finance Commission cycle. 
 The Committee note that while the Department has attempted to explain the 
rationale for reduced allocations under various schemes, the reply remains 
inadequate and evasive on several critical issues raised by the Committee. Despite 
the heavy expenditure of ₹7,204.50 crore in the previous financial year, the 
Department’s lower BE proposal for 2025 –26 appears incongruous and la cks 
adequate justification. The Department has failed to clarify why the BE was pegged 

5 
 
significantly lower despite upward trends in expenditure and pressing scheme 
requirements. 
 With regard to the CONFONET and ICGRS schemes, while the Committee note 
the assurance of the Department to review and reallocation at RE stage, they regret  to 
note that no concrete plan has been specified to safeguard implementation continuity. 
The reply also lacks any specific performance benchmarks or indicators which the 
Department plans to use to monitor and assess fund utilization. 
 In view of the above, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that 
the Department must exercise greater caution and realism in estimating its budgetary 
demands and avoid a casual relian ce on RE -stage reallocations to address 
fundamental planning gaps. The Committee emphasize that critical schemes should 
not suffer from delayed or inadequate funding. 
The Committee therefore impress upon a more prudent budgetary practices to 
ensure that co nsumer welfare schemes are executed with the timeliness, 
accountability, and effectiveness they warrant. 
 
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 3.24) 
 
B. Strengthening of Consumer Commissions (SCC) 
 
1.9 The Committee in their original report observed/ recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee express concern over the vacancy position in Consumer 
Commissions as informed by the Department out of the total 36 sanctioned posts of 
President of State Commissions 18 (50%) posts are vacant and those of 161 
sanctioned posts only 100 Member s are in position.   Similarly, vacancy position in 
Consumer Commission, as informed out of 433  vacant member positions at the 
district level (out of 1,388 sanctioned posts), which represent approximately 31% of 
the total positions. These vacancies contribute to significant capacity constraints, 
potentially undermining the objectives of the Strength ening of Consumer 
Commissions (SCC) Scheme and delaying the timely redressal of consumer 
grievances. Such persistent vacancies, both at the State and District Consumer 
Commissions, are severely impacting the Scheme’s effectiveness and therefore, 
addressing these staffing gaps is critical to alleviating capacity constraints and 
improving the overall functioning of the SCC Scheme, thereby ensuring more efficient 
and timely consumer redressal. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 

6 
 
the Department to take immediate and proactive steps to ensure that States and UTs 
prioritize filling these vacant posts within a fixed time -frame and the Committee may 
be apprised accordingly.” 
  
1.10 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 
“As per Se ction 32 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, if, at any time, there is a 
vacancy in the office of the President or Member of the District Commission, the State 
Government may, by notification, direct – 
a)  any other District Commission specified in that notification to exercise the 
jurisdiction in respect of that district also; or  
b)   the President or a member of any other District Commission specified in 
that notification to exercise the powers and discharge the functions of the 
President or member of that District Commission also.  
 Under the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, it is the 
responsibility of the State Governments to fill up the vacancies of President and 
Members in the State Commissions and District Commissions. Further, as p er Rule 6 
(4) of the Consumer Protection (Qualification for appointment, method of recruitment, 
procedure of appointment, term of office, resignation and removal of the President 
and members of the State Commission and District Commission) Rules, 2020, the  
process of appointments shall be initiated by the State Government at least 6 months 
before the vacancy arises.  
 Besides above, the Department has also been continuously taking up with the 
State Governments/UT Administrations for expeditious filling up o f the existing and 
anticipated vacancies of President and Members of the Consumer Commissions.” 
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs) OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
1.11 The Committee in their recommendation had expressed serious concerns about 
the high number of vacancies in Consumer Commissions at both State and District 
levels, which is affecting the timely resolution of consumer grievances and the 
effectiveness of the SCC Scheme. The Committee had therefore strongly 
recommended to take urgent action and to ensure States and UTs fill these vacancies 
within a fixed timeframe. 
In its action-taken reply, the Department has submitted that under Section 32 of 
the Consumer Pro tection Act, 2019, temporary jurisdictional arrangements can be 
made by State Governments when vacancies occur. The Department has also stated 
that it is the responsibility of the State Governments to fill these vacancies, and that 

7 
 
Rule 6(4) of the Consumer Protection Rules, 2020 mandates initiating the appointment 
process at least six months before a post falls vacant. The Department further 
informed that it is in regular communication with State Governments and UT 
Administrations to expedite the process. 
The Committee acknowledge the statutory framework outlined by the 
Department and the reliance on Section 32 for interim arrangements. However, the 
Committee find the response insufficient and lacking accountability in view of the 
persistent and widespread vacancies that continue to undermine the objective of the 
Strengthening of Consumer Commissions (SCC) Scheme. Invoking statutory 
provisions to shift full responsibility to the States, without evidence of concrete 
outcomes from the Department’s coordination  efforts, appears more procedural than 
solution-oriented. The Committee reiterate that nearly 50% of President positions and 
38% of Member positions remain vacant in State Commissions, while approximately 
31% of sanctioned posts remain unfilled at the dist rict level. These alarming figures 
indicate not merely administrative delays but a systemic failure to prioritize consumer 
justice. The Committee are of the view that invoking Section 32 as a stop -gap cannot 
be a substitute for timely  and permanent  filling up of vacant position , which is 
essential to ensure fair, accessible, and timely consumer grievance redressal. 
Furthermore, the Committee are dismayed to note that no timelines or action plan 
have been furnished by the Department to ensure compliance by t he States/UTs in 
filling the vacancies. The Department’s submission does not reflect any monitoring 
framework, accountability mechanism, or escalation protocol in the event of 
persistent non-compliance by States. 
In light of the above, the Committee reiter ate their recommendation and desire 
to address the matter at the highest level, in order to fill the vacant positions. They 
urge the Department to adopt a more proactive, results -driven approach to address 
the matter of filling vacancies in the Consumer Co mmissions. The Committee further 
urge the Department to develop and share with all States/UTs a time -bound vacancy-
filling calendar aligned with Rule 6(4) and establish a quarterly monitoring mechanism 
to track recruitment progress. Additionally, the Committee desire to be apprised of the 

8 
 
specific action plan, including timelines, monitoring tools, and enforcement steps 
proposed by the Department within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
Recommendation No. 7 (Para No. 3.37) 
C. Computerization & Computer Networking of Consumer Commissions (CONFONET) 
1.12 The Committee in their original report observed/ recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee recognise the Department’s efforts to enhance the efficiency of case 
handling and improve access to case statuses and decisions by revamping 
CONFONET into e -Jagriti and are hopeful that this initiative will significantly benefit 
consumers by enabling them to file complaints seamlessly from anywhere, at any 
time, with multi -lingual support, thereby expediting the disposal and monitoring of 
consumer dispute cases. The Committee desire to be apprised of the measurable 
impact of the newly launched e -Jagriti platform on reducing case pendency and 
improving consumer grievance redressal time to time." 
  
1.13 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: - 
“The new platform, named as “e -Jagriti”, aims to enhance consumer grievance 
redressal through a micro -service architecture, AI/ML integration, and latest features 
like faceless onboarding and role -based dashboards. It unifies existing applications 
(OCMS, e -Daakhil, NCDRC CMS, CONFONET application) into a single, scalable 
system that significantly benefit consumers by enabling them to file complaints 
seamlessly from anywhere, anytime, with multi -lingual s upport. The integrated 
platform streamlines the grievance redressal process, offering faster resolution and 
enhanced transparency. The revamped system also supports real -time data access, 
automated workflows and offer enhanced participation tools for other stakeholders like 
judges, advocates etc. The e -Jagriti platform is now fully operational in the National 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (NCDRC).” 
   [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs) OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
 
1.14 The Committee in their recommendation while appreciating Department’s 
efforts in upgrading CONFONET to the e -Jagriti platform to improve case handling 
and consumer access had hoped that  the initiative would enhance  the efficiency of  
complaint filing and case resolution and , therefore, had sought updates on the 
measurable impact of e -Jagriti in reducing case pendency and improving grievance 
redressal timelines. 

9 
 
While appreciating the Department’s efforts in launching a nd operationalizing 
the e-Jagriti platform, the Committee note with concern that the reply lacks specific 
data or measurable outcomes regarding its stated objectives —namely, reduction in 
case pendency, improvement in grievance redressal timelines, and enha nced user 
access. The Committee had explicitly desired to be apprised of quantifiable impact 
metrics to assess the effectiveness of the new system. However, no data , such as 
comparative timelines before and after launch, number of users onboarded, or case 
disposal rates  has been provided. The Committee are of the view that mere 
technological enhancement, unless supported by periodic data -driven assessments 
and public performance metrics, may not fully address the concerns of delayed 
grievance redressal.  Therefore, the Committee reiterate that the Department  should 
establish a structured monitoring mechanism to track key performance indicators 
such as average disposal time, pendency rates, user satisfaction, and system uptime.  
  

10 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 2.24) 
The Committee note that as against the Demands of ₹327 1.69 crore by the 
Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) an allocation of Budget Estimates (BE) 2025 -26 to 
fund ₹4,230.82 crore has been made for the department in the fiscal year 2025 -26, which is 
₹959.14 crore more than the amount demanded.    The Committee further observe that the 
revised expenditure for 2024 -25 was ₹7,204.50 crore, yet the department has de manded a 
lower BE for 2025-26. Additionally, the Committee express their concern over the consistent 
reduction in budgetary allocations for key schemes, particularly the Price Stabilisation Fund 
(PSF) and consumer protection initiatives. Although there hav e been assurances of 
continued funding through sale proceeds from PSF operations, the department has failed to 
assess the exact requirements under the scheme. The Committee are also concerned by the 
reductions in allocations for programs such as CONFONET, the Consumer Protection Cell 
(ICGRS), and Weights and Measures (Legal Metrology). The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Department to adopt more realistic and cautious budgeting practices to avoid the 
underfunding of critical projects. This may, inter alia, i nclude focusing on strategic resource 
optimization, such as phased implementation and prioritization of essential activities. 
Enhanced coordination with States/UTs may also be ensured along with regular monitoring 
of expenditure to ensure the effective uti lization of funds. Furthermore, the Department 
should consider reallocating surplus funds from less critical schemes to address funding 
gaps in high -priority areas as well as ensure that the schemes/ programmes do not suffer 
due to less allocation and the gaps are fulfilled at RE stage. The Committee hence strongly 
recommend that the Department to exercise greater caution in estimating its demands and 
take all necessary steps to ensure that schemes and programs are not hindered by a lack of 
or under-utilization of allocated funds. 
 
 

11 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.  PSF Operations are dynamic in nature and depend on prevailing market scenario. 
The primary purpose of PSF operations are not to replace the market, but to nudge the 
market players towards a stable pric e regime. The PSF market interventions are broadly 
based on buffer stocking for subsequent release to stabilise volatility in prices arising due to 
seasonality in production, annual variations in production, trade disruptions etc. The annual 
budgetary allocations for PSF take into account the quantum of balance funds available in 
the PSF Corpus to undertake necessary interventions. The   government is committed to 
protecting the consumers from price volatility by ensuring availability of essential food 
commodities at affordable prices.  During the FY 2024 -25 budget allocation at RE level was 
Rs. 7000 crore of which 99.60% was utilized for various PSF operation.  
2. In this context, it is submitted that the budget allocation under the CONFONET 
scheme for 2024 -25 was increased at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage to address the 
additional funding requirements for video conferencing facilities in Consumer Commissions. 
Additionally, the enhanced funds were necessary to ensure the continuity of ongoing 
activities under the scheme. For the financial year 2025 -26, the Department, in consultation 
with the Implementing Agency i.e NIC assessed the realistic fund requirements and 
accordingly proposed an amount of ₹52 crore in the Budget Estimates (BE) 2025-26. 
3.  The Department acknowledges the concern of the Committee regarding the reduced 
allocation for the Integrated Consumer Grievance Redressal System (ICGRS) Scheme 
during 2025 -26. The initial Budget Estimates (BE) for the ICGRS Scheme were prepared 
based on the projected requirements and following a rationalization of expenditure to ensure 
efficient fund utilization.  However, the Department is committed to ensuring that the 
implementation of the scheme is not adversely affected. Accordingly, the Department intends 
to review the fund requirements of the ICGRS Scheme during the course of the year and 
propose an enhancement at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage, based on actual progress 
and need. Furthermore, the Department also intends to enhance the funds allocated under 
the ICGRS Scheme during its revalidation for the Sixteenth Finance Commission (2026 -
2031) to support system upgrades, capacity expansion, and improved outreach. 
  

12 
 
4.  The Department acknowledges the Committee’s concerns regarding reduced 
allocations for Leg al Metrology in BE 2025 –26. It is to state that the allocation of ₹54.30 
crore has been made in accordance with the approved outlay for the ongoing scheme period 
(2021-26), with a focus on completing key infrastructure projects, modernizing Regional 
Reference Standards Laboratories (RRSLs) and advancing initiatives such as the Time 
Dissemination Project, National Legal Metrology Portal and software testing facilities. 
Efficient utilization of available resources and prioritization of essential components wi ll 
ensure that core objectives related to consumer protection, regulatory compliance and trade 
facilitation remain unaffected. To mitigate any potential impact, the Department has adopted 
phased implementation, strengthened coordination with States/UTs and  instituted robust 
monitoring mechanisms. The Department is fully committed to maintaining the momentum of 
modernization in Legal Metrology and ensuring that all key initiatives are delivered effectively 
within the available budgetary framework. 
  
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.8 of Chapter I of the Report)  
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 3.5) 
 
2.2 The Committee note that the allocation of funds under the Consumer Awareness 
(Advertising and Publicity) program has declined in recent years in comparison to 2022 -23 
while the budget for the scheme remaining stagnant at ₹17.99 crore since 2023 -24. The 
actual expenditure for 2023 -24 was ₹24.55 crore, representing a 136.59% increase over 
Revised Estimates. However, despite this increase, the spending trend shows a decline in 
allocated funds over the years. The Committee opine that consumer awareness is a key  
aspect of consumer protection. Given the expanding scope of consumer issues, the 
Department needs to enhance its outreach to consumers particularly in rural areas through 
various channels such as social media, regional languages, and digital campaigns. To  

13 
 
ensure the effectiveness of these efforts, it is critical to guarantee full and efficient utilization 
of funds, maximizing the impact of consumer awareness programs. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the Department assess the impact metrics of its a dvertisements 
to ensure their efficiency and effectiveness, particularly in reaching underserved and remote 
regions, including rural areas and ensure that the funds allocated for consumer awareness 
are used effectively and reach the widest audience possible. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.3 The recommendations of the Committee have been duly noted. It is pertinent to 
mention that while the Budget Estimate for 2023 –24 was ₹17.99 crore, the Department 
ensured efficient and impactful utilization of available resou rces, leading to an actual 
expenditure of ₹24.55 crore, which is 136.59% of the Budget Estimates and alomost 100% 
of RE i.e. 25.00 Cr. for FY 2023-24. Further, recognizing that consumer awareness is pivotal 
to consumer protection, especially in the context  of emerging digital markets and increasing 
complexity in consumer grievances, the Department has taken steps to diversify its outreach 
channels. Efforts have been made to leverage social media, participation in fairs and 
festivals where people from rural and backward areas congregate, convening VC interaction 
with panchayats in States in their regional languages, and expanding digital communication 
strategies to reach rural and remote areas effectively. In line with the Committee’s 
recommendation, the Depa rtment is working towards the development of robust impact 
assessment mechanisms for its publicity campaigns, seeking report from the organizations/ 
agencies through which the campaigns are run/ executed. The Department remains 
committed to efficient fund utilization also focusing to strengthen consumer by running 
awareness campaign specifically in rural & remote areas in FY 2025 -26. The Department is 
also conducting weekly interaction programme with the Panchyats of India to empower the 
rural consumers about their rights 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
 
 

14 
 
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No. 3.10) 
  
2.4 The Committee are pleased to note that, as part of the initiative to expedite consumer 
grievance redressal, the Department has launched a new version of the Consumer Helpline 
software (https://consumerhelpline.gov.in). This update includes the integration of WhatsApp 
for lodging grievances, and approximately 1 ,038 private companies have been made 
convergence partners to facilitate swift and effective resolution. Moreover, the Department 
has begun implementing Artificial Intelligence (AI) to streamline the grievance submission 
process for consumers. The Committe e look forward to the timely completion and full 
implementation of this initiative. The Committee hope for timely introduction and 
implementation of WhatsApp-base AI chatbot for real-time complaint resolution, which would 
further enhance the efficiency of the system. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.5 The National Consumer Helpline (NCH) administered by the Department of Consumer 
Affairs has emerged as a single point of access to consumers across the country for their 
grievance redressal at a pre -litigation stage. Consumers can register their grievances from 
all over the country in 17 languages including Hindi, English, Kashmiri, Punjabi, Nepali, 
Gujarati, Marathi, Kannada, Telugu, Tamil, Malayalam, Maithili, Santhali, Bengali, Odia, 
Assamese and Manipuri thr ough a toll -free number 1915. These grievances can be 
registered on Integrated Grievance Redressal Mechanism (INGRAM), an omni -channel IT 
enabled central portal, through various channels - WhatsApp (8800001915), SMS 
(8800001915), email (nch -ca@gov.in), the NCH app, the web portal 
(consumerhelpline.gov.in) and the Umang app, as per their convenience.   1083 companies, 
who have voluntarily partnered with NCH, as part of the ‘Convergence’ programme directly 
respond to these grievances according to their redressa l process and revert by providing a 
feedback to the complainant on the portal. Complaints against those companies, who have 
not partnered with National Consumer Helpline, are forwarded to the company for redressal. 
  
 The technological transformation of the NCH has significantly boosted its call-handling 
capacity. The number of calls received by NCH has grown more than tenfold, from 12,553 in 

15 
 
December 2015 to 1,55,138 in December 2024. Similarly, the average number of complaints 
registered per month has inc reased from 37,062 in 2017 to 1,11,951 in 2024. Additionally, 
grievance registration via WhatsApp has gained momentum, with the percentage of 
complaints filed through the platform increasing from 3% in March 2023 to 20% in March 
2025, demonstrating a growi ng preference for digital communication channels. This 
exponential growth reflects the rising confidence of consumers in the helpline. 
  
 NCH has introduced AI -based Speech Recognition, a Translation System, and an AI 
enabled Chatbot as part of the NCH 2.0  initiative. These technological advancements aim to 
make the grievance filing process more seamless, efficient, and inclusive. The AI -powered 
Speech Recognition and Translation System enables consumers to file complaints through 
voice input, reducing manu al intervention. The AI enabled Chatbot provides real -time 
assistance, streamlining complaint -handling processes, and improving the overall user 
experience. These upgrades ensure that consumers have equal access to the grievance 
redressal system. 
  
 In lin e with the Committee’s recommendation, the Department  is in the process 
of implementation of WhatsApp -based AI chatbot for real -time complaint resolution, which 
would further enhance the efficiency of the system as a step forward. 
  
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 4 (Para No. 3.11) 
   
2.6 The Committee are dismayed to note that the budget for the National Consumer 
Helpline (NCH) has remained unchanged, despite the significant increase in consumer 
complaints, which grew from 54,516 in 2020 to 111,951 in 2024. To improve the efficiency of 
consumer complaint resolution, enhance response mechanisms, and strengthen 
coordination with NCH, it is imperative to ensure that allocated funds are effectively and 
optimally utilized. The Committee is concerned by the low fund utilization during 2024 -25, 
with only 57.27% of the budget spent, highlighting a considerable gap between the Revised 

16 
 
Estimates (RE) and Actual Expenditure (AE). The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
department not only for improving the efficient use of allocated funds but also allo cating 
additional resources to expand language support and increase the helpline workforce. The 
Committee further suggest conducting a performance audit to identify any bottlenecks in 
fund utilization and implement corrective actions to ensure the timely a nd effective 
deployment of resources. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.7 The status of fund utilization under the Integrated Consumer Grievance Redressal 
System (ICGRS) Scheme during 2024-25 (up to 31.03.2025) is as follows: 
  
Scheme 
  
  
B.E. 
  
R.E. 
  
A.E. 
  
% Expenditure 
w.r.t. R.E. 
ICGRS 6.25 cr. 8.74 cr. 8.49 cr. 
  
97.00% 
 
The Department intends to enhance the funds allocated under the ICGRS Scheme during its 
revalidation for the Sixteenth Finance Commission (2026 -2031). Digital transformation with 
the help of technology, Infrastructure updating, capacity building and awareness for broader 
outreach are some of the initiatives in collaboration with relevant agencies managing the 
helpline, to maintain and improve service standards. 
  
 Furthermore, the Department has decided to conduct an Impact Assessment Study to 
evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the grievance redressal system at the pre -
litigation stage, with the objective of enhancing its robustness and accessibility. Proposals in 
this regard have been solicited from the Indian Institutes of Management (IIMs). 
  
The Department remains committed to strengthening the helpline in alignment with 
the vision of the Committee and will continue to assess and refine its strategies to meet 
consumer needs effectively. 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
 
 

17 
 
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 3.24) 
 
2.8 The Committee express concern over the vacancy position in Consumer 
Commissions as informed by the Department out of the total 36 sanctioned posts of 
President of State Commissions 18 (50%) posts are vacant and those of 161 sanctioned 
posts only 100 Members are in position.   Similarly, vacancy position in Consumer  
Commission, as informed out of   433 vacant member positions at the district level (out of 
1,388 sanctioned posts), which represent approximately 31% of the total positions. These 
vacancies contribute to significant capacity constraints, potentially underm ining the 
objectives of the Strengthening of Consumer Commissions (SCC) Scheme and delaying the 
timely redressal of consumer grievances. Such persistent vacancies, both at the State and 
District Consumer Commissions, are severely impacting the Scheme’s eff ectiveness and 
therefore, addressing these staffing gaps is critical to alleviating capacity constraints and 
improving the overall functioning of the SCC Scheme, thereby ensuring more efficient and 
timely consumer redressal. The Committee, therefore, stron gly recommend that the 
Department to take immediate and proactive steps to ensure that States and UTs prioritize 
filling these vacant posts within a fixed time -frame and the Committee may be apprised 
accordingly. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.9 As per Sectio n 32 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, if, at any time, there is a 
vacancy in the office of the President or Member of the District Commission, the State 
Government may, by notification, direct – 
a)  any other District Commission specified in that noti fication to exercise the 
jurisdiction in respect of that district also; or  
b)   the President or a member of any other District Commission specified in that 
notification to exercise the powers and discharge the functions of the President or 
member of that District Commission also.  
 Under the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, it is the responsibility of 
the State Governments to fill up the vacancies of President and Members in the State 
Commissions and District Commissions. Further, as per Rule 6 (4) of the Consumer 

18 
 
Protection (Qualification for appointment, method of recruitment, procedure of appointment, 
term of office, resignation and removal of the President and members of the State 
Commission and District Commission) Rules, 2020, the process of appointments shall be  
initiated by the State Government at least 6 months before the vacancy arises.  
 Besides above, the Department has also been continuously taking up with the State 
Governments/UT Administrations for expeditious filling up of the existing and anticipated 
vacancies of President and Members of the Consumer Commissions. 
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.11 of Chapter I of the Report)  
 
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No. 3.25) 
2.10 The Committee note that actual expenditure under the SCC Scheme has consistently 
been revised downward from the Budget Estimates since 2020 -21, with the exception of 
2024-25, and conclude that this downward revision is largely due to slow fund disbursement 
caused by delays in the submission of eligible proposals and pending Utilization Certificates 
(UCs) from States. The Committee find that these administrative delays are significantly  
hindering the optimal utilization of allocated funds and therefore, recommend that proactive 
measures may be taken to facilitate the timely submission of Utilization Certificates and 
ensure that funds are disbursed efficiently. The Committee also urge the  department to 
explore the possibility of dynamically reallocating unutilized funds from underperforming 
regions to states that demonstrate readiness and compliance with the scheme’s objectives, 
in order to ensure the optimal utilization of resources and e nable states with the capacity to 
implement the SCC Scheme effectively. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.11 Under the SCC scheme, funds are being released to the States/UTs from where 
proposals are being submitted in accordance with the SCC guidelines. The states are 
routinely impressed upon to furnish the proposals in accordance with the scheme guidelines 

19 
 
as well as furnish the pending U.Cs lying with them in respect of funds earlier released to 
them under the SCC scheme. The Department is pro actively taking steps to ensure that the 
states/U.Ts furnish the proposals seeking funds under the SCC scheme to upgrade  the 
infrastructure of Consumer Commissions located in respective states/U.Ts. These include 
various regional workshops, conferences on the occasion of National Consumer Day as well 
as World Consumer Rights Day which see participation from the concerned st akeholders. 
Besides, various VC Meetings as well as D.O letters are sent routinely to the eligible 
states/U.Ts requesting them to furnish the proposal under SCC scheme to this department. 
As a result of these sustained efforts of the department, during F.Y  2024-25, the budget for 
the SCC scheme was revised upwards to ₹ 7 crore from ₹ 5 crore, 100% of which was 
successfully released to the states/U.Ts who furnished the proposal complying with the 
extant guidelines of the SCC scheme. 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 7 (Para No. 3.37) 
2.12 The Committee recognise the Department’s efforts to enhance the efficiency of case 
handling and improve access to case statuses and decisions by revamping CONFONET into 
e-Jagriti and are hopeful that this initiative will significantly benefit consumers by enabling 
them to file complaints seamlessly from anywhere, at any time, with multi -lingual support, 
thereby expediting the disposal and monitoring of consumer dispute cases. The Committee 
desire to be apprised of the measurable impact of the newly launched e -Jagriti platform on 
reducing case pendency and improving consumer grievance redressal time to time. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.13 The new platform, named as “e -Jagriti”, aims to enhance consumer grievance 
redressal through a micro -service architecture, AI/ML integration, and latest features like 
faceless onboarding and role -based dashboards. It unifies e xisting applications (OCMS, e -
Daakhil, NCDRC CMS, CONFONET application) into a single, scalable system that 
significantly benefit consumers by enabling them to file complaints seamlessly from 

20 
 
anywhere, anytime, with multi -lingual support. The integrated pl atform streamlines the 
grievance redressal process, offering faster resolution and enhanced transparency. The 
revamped system also supports real -time data access, automated workflows and offer 
enhanced participation tools for other stakeholders like judges , advocates etc. The e -Jagriti 
platform is now fully operational in the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
(NCDRC). 
   [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.14 of Chapter I of the Report)  
 
Recommendation No. 8 (Para No. 3.38)  
2.14 The Committee are concerned to note that after an upward revision of allocation for 
CONFONET to ₹ 70 crore at RE stage during  2024-25, the utilization of fund is ₹41.93 crore 
(upto 14.2.2025).   Moreover, BE for 2025 -26 has also been kept at ₹52 crore only.   The 
Committee find that at this stage of expansion of CONFONET such poor utilization of Budget 
and less allocation than RE may not be suitable.    The Committee therefore urge the 
Department to identify the bottlenecks in the effective utilization of funds and conduct a more 
thorough financial assessment to ensure the optimal use of the allocated resources and 
allocation of required fund at RE stage. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.15 The budgetary provision has been enhanced from ₹ 42 Crore to ₹ 70 Cr at RE stage 
during the financial year 2024 -25 and the same has been fully utilized. The BE for 2025 -26 
has been kept as per the anticipated requirements for manpower and e- Jagriti platform. 
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
 
 

21 
 
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 3.49) 
2.16 The Committee observe that the Budget Estimates (BE) for 2024 -25 under the Price 
Stabilization Fund (PSF) saw a substantial increase, rising to ₹10,000 crore from a nominal 
₹0.01 crore in 2023-24. However, this allocation was later revised downward to ₹7,000 crore 
in the Revised Estimate (RE) for 2024 -25, with actual expenditure reaching ₹6,910 crore as 
of February 15, 2025, indicating that the funds allocated were not fully utilized. Also for 2025-
26, the PSF budget has been significantly reduced to ₹4,019.83 crore. The  Committee 
understand that Price Stabilisation Fund (PSF) scheme was approved on 18.09.2024 for 
continuation during the 16th Finance Commission award period till 2025-26 with a total outlay 
of ₹10,019.83 crore as a sub -component of the PM -AASHA scheme. Out  of the approved 
outlay, ₹ 7,000 crore is allocated in 2024 -25 (RE) and ₹ 4,019.83 crore in 2025 -26 including 
Rs.1,000 appropriated from other sub -scheme of PM -AASHA.  In light of the ongoing price 
volatility of essential food commodities, the Committee re commend that a minimum 
allocation be ensured to support the timely disbursement of funds to key agencies, such as 
NCCF, NAFED, KendriyaBhandar and MMTC, in order to avoid delays in procurement. The 
Committee also impress upon the critical importance of str engthening buffer stock storage 
infrastructure to minimize wastage and enhance the effectiveness of market interventions 
under the fund. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.17 The annual budgetary allocations for PSF take into account the quantum of balance 
funds available in the PSF Corpus to undertake necessary interventions. The total available 
fund comprising annual budgetary support and balance fund in the Corpus is sufficient for 
market interventions and for buffer building. The PSF scheme is on-boarded in CNA Model-2 
of fund flow and fund are disbursed to Implementing Agencies on Just -in-Time basis. In 
order to determine the long -term storage losses in pulses, the Department has assigned a 
study titled,  Determining Storage Losses of Pulses Stored in Warehouse s and to 
Recommend Norms for Loss/Gain during Long Term Storage, to ICAR-CIPHET, Ludhiana. 
   [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 

22 
 
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No. 3.50) 
2.18 The Committee note that the disbursement of funds under the PSF to several states 
and key agencies, such as NAFED, MMTC, NCCF, and KendriyaBhandar, has not been 
uniform. The Committee opine that   strengthening the monitoring system to track 
procurement activities for essential commodities like pulses, onions, and potatoes, improving 
buffer stock management, and conducting periodic reviews of fund utilization at the state 
level will help achieve the goals of the PSF Scheme more effectively. There fore, it is 
recommend that steps be taken to implement a more streamlined fund release process to 
minimize delays in disbursement and ensure the uniform distribution of fund. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.19 Funds to Implementing agencies (NCCF, Nafed, FCI) a nd vendors are disbursed as 
per the progress made in the implementation of the approved operation or activity. In order 
to streamline the disbursement of of funds,  PSF scheme has been on -boarded in CNA 
Model-2 of fund flow and funds are disbursed on Just i n Time basis to implementing 
agencies. The progress of procurement made by the Implementing Agencies are monitored 
on daily basis. 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 11 (Para No. 3.64) 
2.20 The Committee note that the Central Nodal Agencies (CNAs), such as NCCF, 
NAFED, and KendriyaBhandar, play a crucial role in procurement and market stabilization, 
particularly through retail interventi ons in essential commodities like Bharat Dal, which 
includes perishable commodities such as tomatoes and onions. Acknowledging the 
importance of these interventions, the Committee urge that, in order to further enhance the 
effectiveness of market intervent ions, the availability of Bharat Brand products should be 
expanded to more states through CNAs and increasing and expanding cold storage capacity 

23 
 
for perishable commodities, such as tomatoes and onions, across states to minimize losses 
and reduce wastage. 
Also, while commending the department for its initiatives in launching the E -Samyukti 
portal for farmer registration and procurement tracking, and recognizing it as a significant 
step towards ensuring that farmers receive fair prices for their produce, the  Committee 
recommend to enhance digital integration by linking the E -Samyukti portal with AI -driven 
demand forecasting, which would improve operational efficiency. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.21 The Department has, through NAFED and NCCF, invited proposals from controlled 
atmosphere (CA) warehouse operators for storage of onion across 19 major consumption 
centres. The objective is to reduce storage loss, efficient disposal of onion to stabilise pr ices 
and also to encourage the development of CA storage infrastructure in the country. 
Presently, NCCF and NAFED  undertake procurement of pulses from pre -registered farmers 
through their online procurement portals   like E-Samyukti, E-Samriddhi. The Depar tment is 
constantly monitoring prices and availability situation in pulses, onion, tomato and potato. 
Price forecasting models using a combination of fundamental and technical analyses and 
machine learning (ML) model are used for price forecasting to support decision making.  
  
 NCCF is committed to serve the consumers of the country and therefore agrees to the 
recommendations of the committee. Further, It is informed that NCCF is taking appropriate 
steps to increase the reach to more states. For onion storage this year it is prop osed to 
double cold storage/ controlled atmosphere storage.  
  
 An AI based algorithmic models can be build based on the real -time market dynamics 
by integrating data from weather patterns, market trends, supply chains (domestic and global 
production, dist ribution, stock etc.) and consumer behavior which provide insights of the 
demand patterns. These key influencing factors to populate precise demand forecasting and 
can help farmers registered under eSamyukti to strategically optimize their crop planning and 
production which will result in better income realization as well as valuable contribution to the 

24 
 
national food security. As the model matures different crop advisories related to weather, 
production practices, price trends would also be extended to the farmers. The sustained 
engagement of farmers through eSamyukti will certainly be helpful in bringing operational 
efficiency.  
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 12 (Para No. 3.73) 
  
2.22 The Committee note that only 71.5% of the RE for 2024 -25 relating to Consumer 
Welfare Fund (CWF) has been utilized as of 14.2.2025. The Committee also note that the 
CWF has been established in 25 St ates/UTs, and it is proposed to extend the establishment 
of the Consumer Welfare Fund (Corpus) to the remaining states/UTs during 2025 -26. The 
Committee recommend that the Department should prioritize the establishment of the CWF 
in those States/UTs where it has not yet been set up, including consistent follow -up with 
states such as Chhattisgarh and Himachal Pradesh, which are in the advanced stages of 
establishing their funds. The Committee stress that in order to ensure comprehensive 
nationwide coverage a nd strengthen consumer welfare initiatives across the country, the 
fund may be established in all states/UTs by the end of FY 2025-26. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.23 The recommendation of the Committee has been duly noted.With the establishment 
of CWF in Himachal Pradesh, the total number of States/UTs that have established CWF 
has reached 26. The states of Chhattisgarh, Punjab etc are in advance stage of establishing 
CWF. In this regard, a D.O. letter dated April 30, 2025 has already been issued to states  
which are yet to establish CWF. 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
 
 

25 
 
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 3.74) 
2.24 The Committee note that the delay in receiving  Utilization Certificates from the states 
is hindering the optimum utilization of funds under CWF. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the department should strengthen its monitoring and evaluation systems to 
track the effective utilization of funds under the CWF. This should include ensuring the timely 
submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs) and conducting regular reviews of projects to 
assess their impact. Also, a more structured evaluation framework should be implemented, 
with clear and measura ble outcomes to track the success of funded projects, ensuring that 
the funds disbursed directly benefit consumers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.25 The recommendation of the Committee has been duly noted.   As per the guidelines 
and terms & condition of Consumer Welfare Fund(CWF), all the concerned states have to 
furnish the Utilization Certificate by the end of financial year. A D.O. letter will be issued to all 
the concerned States/UTs, followed with review meetings. 
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 14 (Para No. 3.82) 
2.26 With the reduced Budget Estimate for 2025 -26 of ₹54.30 crore, which is lower than 
the Revised Estimates (RE) of ₹60.00 crore for 2024 -25, the Committee hope that, despite 
this reduction, key initiatives under the sub -scheme ‘Strengthening of the Legal Metrology 
Regulation and Enforcement’ —including strengthening Regional Reference Standards 
Laboratories (RRSLs), mod ernizing state -level legal metrology facilities, advancing time 
dissemination projects, and other related initiatives —will be completed efficiently, while 
prioritizing essential activities. The Committee urge that the Department to take necessary 
steps to intensify efforts to streamline and expedite the proposal submission process for 
States/UTs under the Strengthening Legal Metrology Infrastructure scheme, and ensure the 
timely and effective implementation of these critical projects. The Committee also des ire to 
be updated on the progress made and the timely completion of such projects. 

26 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.27 The Department assures that despite the reduced Budget Estimate of Rs. 54.30 crore 
for 2025–26, all key initiatives under the sub -scheme ‘Strengthening of the Legal Metrology 
Regulation and Enforcement’ will be implemented effectively through strategic prioritization 
and efficient resource utilization. Critical projects such as the modernization of RRSLs, 
enhancement of state-level legal metrology facilities, advancement of the time dissemination 
initiative and establishment of software testing facilities will continue to be executed in a 
phased and time-bound manner, ensuring minimal disruption. 
2.28 To further improve implementation, the D epartment has intensified its engagement 
with States/ UTs by streamlining the proposal submission process through regular follow -
ups, capacity -building sessions and proactive technical assistance. Structured review 
mechanisms have been put in place to moni tor progress, resolve procedural delays and 
facilitate timely release of funds. The Department remains committed to providing regular 
updates to the Committee and ensuring the timely and successful completion of all critical 
Legal Metrology projects in alignment with national objectives. 
   [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 15 (Para No. 3.83) 
2.29 The Committee note that, currently, Indian Standard Time (IST) is not being 
mandatorily adopted by all Telecom Service Providers (TSPs) and Internet Service Providers 
(ISPs) and lack of uniformity in time across different systems presents significant chall enges 
for law enforcement agencies (LEAs) in investigating cybercrimes. Therefore , keeping in 
view the critical role of synchronized time systems in strategic sectors and national security, 
the Committee emphasizes the importance of aligning all networks and computers in the 
country with a national clock. The Committee note that with the funds allocated for 
renovation of RRSLs for time project to CPWD an for procurement of equipment   by NPL 
and ISRO, the Committee recommend that the Department should prior itize the swift 
completion and expansion of the Time Dissemination Project to ensure nationwide 
synchronization of time systems including establishing and completing time dissemination 

27 
 
infrastructure at all Regional Reference Standard Laboratories (RRSLs) and ensuring that 
TSPs and ISPs adopt Indian Standard Time (IST).  
 
Reply of the Government 
2.30 The Department is committed for uniform adoption of Indian Standard Time (IST) 
which is vital for national security, effective cybercrime investigation and synchronization 
across strategic sectors.  The Time Dissemination Project is being implemented as a priority 
initiative, with active collaboration between the Department, CSIR -NPL, ISRO, CPWD and 
other stakeholders. Funds have been allocated for the renova tion of RRSLs and 
procurement of high -precision equipment and work is progressing in a phased and time -
bound manner to establish robust time dissemination infrastructure across all RRSLs. 
 Efforts are also underway to engage with relevant regulatory bodies  and stakeholders 
to promote the mandatory adoption of Indian Standard Time (IST) by all Telecom Service 
Providers (TSPs) and Internet Service Providers (ISPs). The Department is committed to 
ensuring seamless and accurate dissemination of IST through dedi cated reference nodes, 
thereby achieving uniformity in timekeeping across digital networks. Regular monitoring and 
inter-agency coordination are being undertaken to ensure swift implementation and the 
Department remains committed to the timely and successf ul completion of this nationally 
significant project. 
   [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
  
Recommendation No. 16 (Para No. 3.93) 
2.31 The Committee note that the Budget Estimates (BE) for National Test House (NTH) 
for 2025-26 has been increased to ₹65.8 crore as compared to ₹35 crore for BE 2024 -25. 
However, the Committee are dismayed to learn that the utilization of funds as of February  
13, 2025, stands at only 67%. Given the critical role of these facilities in advancing national 
goals like "Atmanirbhar Bharat" and driving technological progress, it is imperative that 
procurement processes for equipment and construction works be expedit ed.  The 

28 
 
Committee, therefore, recommend the NTH to prioritize the timely completion of key 
infrastructure projects, such as the Integrated Test Facility for Power Transmission & 
Distribution Sectors, Electric Vehicle (EV) Battery Test Facilities, and Sola r PV Module Test 
Facility.   The Committee also urge NTH to ensure full utilization of the Revised Estimates 
(RE) for FY 2024 -25 by closely monitoring budget expenditure and ensuring that funds are 
effectively allocated and used for the successful completion of ongoing projects by the end of 
the fiscal year. 
Reply of the Government 
2.32 With respect to the Committee’s observation on budget utilization, it is humbly 
intimated that, at the end of FY 2024-25, 86% of the allocated budget was utilized (BE: ₹35.0 
crore, RE: ₹38.22 crore & AE: ₹32.96 crore). The shortfall in achieving full utilization is 
primarily attributable to the funds earmarked for the NER Region under the 10% GBS 
scheme, where the procurement of capital equipment and the lab integration proje ct are in 
progress, resulting in partial utilization of the allocated funds. 
 NTH remains fully committed to prioritize the timely completion of the key projects and 
concrete steps have been taken in this direction. Efforts are being made to ensure that th ese 
projects are completed as per the stipulated timelines and contribute meaningfully to India’s 
evolving industrial and technological landscape. Going forward, NTH has been implemented 
a more robust monitoring mechanism to track budget expenditure, enhan ce inter -
departmental coordination, and ensure the full and effective utilization of the Budget 
Estimates (BE) for FY 2025-26. 
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 17 (Para No. 3.94) 
2.33 In their 5th Report, the Committee had urged National Test House(NTH) to establish a 
collaborative framework with the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) and the Central 
Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) to address gaps in testing and regulatory 
oversight for radiation -emitting medical devices such as X -ray and MRI machines. The 

29 
 
Committee are disappointed to learn that no tangible progress has been made in this regard. 
Hence, the Committee strongly urge again the NTH to accelerate its efforts to collaborate  
with AERB and CDSCO, focusing on developing specialized testing and regulatory 
frameworks for radiation-emitting medical devices. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.34 NTH is a premier scientific institution in the country, specializing in testing, calibration, 
and quality evaluation across a wide range of sectors, including industry, commerce, and 
trade, adhering to international and national standards in these areas. However, medical 
devices in our country are regulated under Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and M edical 
Devices Rules, 2017 by the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO)  under 
the administrative control of MoHFW. It is the National Regulatory Authority for these 
devices. Besides, Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB)  oversees the regulati on, 
specifically for radiation -emitting medical devices. As a result, the regulatory and testing 
needs of devices such as X-ray and MRI machines, which are critical to healthcare services, 
are to be assessed by CDSCO. In response to the Committee's recomme ndation, NTH is 
committed to exploring a collaborative framework with CDSCO and AERB to address the 
identified gaps and strengthen regulatory oversight, ensuring compliance with safety 
standards, and safeguarding public health.  DoCA has already written to MoHFW in this 
regard. 
  
  NTH is making targeted investments in advanced testing infrastructure, as well as 
staff training programs, and exploring partnerships with leading research institutions to 
enhance our knowledge and build the necessary capacity in the country. NTH remains 
committed to supporting national regulatory efforts and upholding safety standards across all 
sectors within our mandate. NTH will continue to engage with relevant stakeholders to 
explore potential areas of collaboration and development. 
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
 
 

30 
 
Recommendation No. 18 (Para No. 3.95) 
2.35 The Committee opine that by building specialized capabilities in advance testing 
infrastructure specially in drones, electric vehicles and solar energy the NTH will not only 
enhance public safety and regulatory oversight but also contribute to India's self -reliance in 
technology, while supporting the national drive for innovation and the establishment of high -
quality standards.  The Committee, therefore recommend that NTH to prioritize and expedite 
investments in advanced testing infrastructure and staff training also strive to establish at 
least one testing centre/facility in each state. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.36 NTH is actively enhancing its technical capabilities to strengthen the delivery of critical 
testing, calibration, and quality assurance services. Current efforts are focused on key 
sectors such as consumer goods, construction materials, and industrial products, with an 
overarching goal of ensuring product safety and compliance with national and international 
standards. 
  
 Recognizing the evolving needs of industry, NTH is strategically diversifying into 
emerging and high -growth sectors, including drone technology, electric vehicle (EV) 
batteries, solar photovoltaic modules, and organic food testing. This expansion is driven by 
growing demand and the pressing need to improve regional access to advanced testing  
facilities. 
  
 While NTH is committed to extending its service footprint, broadening the network of 
testing centers requires substantial investment in infrastructure, human resources, and 
advanced equipment, and also recruiting and training specialized te chnical personnel, 
alongside the procurement of sophisticated testing instruments.  At present, NTH operates 
six regional centers and two satellite centers. The Bangalore facility, currently under 
construction will be a significant milestone, housing an EV battery testing unit and an 
upcoming facility for aerospace components testing, reinforcing NTH’s commitment to 
supporting innovation and next -generation technologies.  Going forward, NTH aims to 

31 
 
gradually expand its national footprint. However, the locatio n and timing of new centers will 
be guided by a range of considerations, including regional demand, industrial development 
patterns, resource availability, and logistical feasibility. 
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
  
Recommendation No. 19 (Para No. 3.104) 
2.37 The Committee note that the number of Gold Assaying and Hallmarking Centres 
(AHCs) during 2024-25 stood at 1,621, while there was a significant increase in the number 
of BIS Registered Jewellers from 1,87,936 to 1,96,902 between April 2024 and January 
2025 and approximately 12 crore articles of gold and silver jewellery/artefacts were 
hallmarked during this period. It is evident that there is an i ncreasing demand and significant 
potential for expansion, the Committee, therefore, recommend that the department should 
take steps to enhance the accessibility of hallmarking services and further strengthen the 
gold certification system. The Committee als o urge the Department to prioritize the 
establishment and expansion of AHCs, particularly in underserved and rural areas, including 
districts that currently lack such infrastructure. They opine that expanding the network of 
AHCs in these areas will not onl y improve consumer trust but also provide a robust system 
of third-party assurance on the purity of gold and silver jewellery. 
Furthermore, the Committee emphasize that under the existing financial assistance 
scheme, BIS should ensure the full utilization of allocated funds and meet the targeted 
establishment of AHCs in these regions so as to ensure hallmarking services reach all 
segments of the population and foster greater transparency and consumer protection in the 
gold and silver jewellery sector. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.38 Setting up of Assaying and Hallmarking Centres (AHCs) is a market driven activity in 
which the decision to establish an AHC at a particular location is taken by an entrepreneur 
based on the business viability. However, based on  the availability of funds, BIS invites 
Expression of Interest (EOI) from the entrepreneurs for setting up the AHC at deficient 

32 
 
locations with Central Assistance and also provides financial assistance to the eligible 
applicants wherever requested for setting up the AHC.  
 Out of the 1600 AHCs which are recognised by BIS till date, only 104 have been 
setup with financial assistance from the Central Government. The remaining AHCs have 
been set up independently by the applicants, based solely on market demand and 
commercial viability, without any Central Assistance. 
 Further, with an objective to expand the existing hallmarking infrastructure and to 
provide the jewellers an easy access to the hallmarking facility, Bureau of Indian Standards 
(BIS), rolled out a policy in 2022 allowing the BIS Recognised AHCs to set up Off -Site 
Centres (OSCs). An OSC, which is conceived of as an extended arm of an AHC, has all the 
facilities as in an AHC except the facilities required for fire assay. Since its launch, 98 OSCs 
have been setup by the BIS Recognised AHCs as on date.  
 In order to prioritize the establishment and expansion of AHCs, particularly in 
underserved and rural areas, including districts that currently lack such infrastructure, BIS is 
considering floating an EO I in the Financial year 2025 -26 for the interested applicants to 
apply for the setting up of AHCs in the deficient districts under the Central Assistance 
Scheme. 
 The annual targets for the establishment of AHCs have consistently been achieved in 
the past,  except during the COVID years. In the FY 2024 -25, financial assistance was 
provided to 11 AHCs against a target of 10 under the Infrastructure Building component of 
the Plan Scheme.  
 Further, for the current financial year, i.e., 2025 -26, efforts will be made to ensure that 
the targets set by the Government under the plan scheme are fully achieved. 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. H-12015/1/2025 dated 27.05.2025] 
 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
-   NIL  - 
 
 
  

34 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES  OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
 
- NIL  -  

35 
 
CHAPTER - V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;      (KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI) 
08 September, 2025                  Chairperson 
17 Bhadrapada, 1947 (Saka)                 Standing Committee on Consumer  
Affairs and Public Distribution

36 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE  SIXTEENTHSITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024 -2025) HELD ON MONDAY, 8 TH 
SEPTEMBER, 2025 
 
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘2’,  Extension to 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Anto Antony 
3.Shri Jaswantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor 
4. Smt. Malvika Devi 
5. Shri Manish Jaiswal 
6. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
7. Shri Manoj Kumar 
8. Shri Sunil Kumar 
9. Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah 
10.Shri Neeraj Maurya 
11.Shri Bastipati Nagaraju 
12. Shri Haribhai Patel 
13. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
14.Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu 
15. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh 
16. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane 
17.Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
18.Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 
 19.Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
 20.Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
 21. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
 22. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
 23. Shri Kanad Purkayastha 
 24. Shri Kamal Haasan 
 25. Smt. Rajathi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi                 - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi                 - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                 - Deputy Secretary 

37 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft Reports of the Committee: 
(i) Eleventh Report on Action Taken   by   the   Government   on the Observations/  
Recommendationscontained in the SeventhReport of the Committee (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants (2025 -26) of  the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department ofConsumer Affairs); and 
 
(ii) XXXX                      XXXX   XXXX           XXXX 
 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the abovementioned Draft Reports of the 
Committee.  
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft Reports without any 
amendments/modifications.  
5.  The Committee then authorized Hon’ble Chairperson to finalize and present the aforesaid 
Reportsto the Speaker under the Direction 71 A (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha as 
the House is not in session. Further, as per Rule 280 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha the Reports would be presented to the House during the next session. 
6.  The Committee, thereafter, decided to hold the next sitting of the Committee for oral 
evidence of the officials of State Government of Bihar, Meghalaya, Telangana, Tamil Nadu  & Kerala 
and Department of Food and Public Distribution on the subject ‘Modernisation of Public Distribution 
System- Strengthening Technical Data base’ on 19 September, 2025. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
************* 
 
XXXX Matter does not pertain to report 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024-2025) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
(i) Total number of Recommendations:                                                             19 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted               by the Government :19 
Recommendation Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 
19 
(Chapter – II, Total 19) 
Percentage: 100% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not  desire to pursue in view 
of there plies received from the Government: 
Recommendation No. Nil 
(Chapter–III, Total- NIL) 
Percentage: 0% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Recommendation No. Nil 
 (Chapter–IV, Total - NIL 
Percentage: 0% 
(v) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which the interim replies of the 
Government have been received. 
Recommendation No. Nil 
       (Chapter–V, Total NIL_) 
Percentage: 0% 
 
 
 
 
 
 